Biology 16 Ecology
STAFF: Professor: Laboratory Coordinator: Graduate Assistants:

BIOL 16: ECOLOGY
GENERAL INFORMATION
Rebecca Irwin (LSC 333) Craig Layne (LSC 121) Jacob Heiling (LSC 135) Andrew Sanders (LSC 135)

Fall 2014 Irwin

OFFICE HOURS: Office hours for Professor Irwin will be during Bio 16 xhours on Thursdays 12-12:50 in LSC 333. That way everyone in the class has that timeslot open and can make office hours when they have questions. Graduate assistants will also have office hours as follows: Jacob Heiling on Mondays 2-3 pm and Fridays 11:10-12:10 in LSC 135. Andrew Sanders on M and W 11:10-12:10 in LSC 135. You can also set up one-on-one appointments to meet with any of us. The easiest way to make an appointment is via e-mail. TEXTS and READINGS: Required lecture readings will come primarily from scientific journals and the following text:
Molles, M. C. 2012. Ecology: Concepts and Applications, 6th edition. Papers assigned from scientific journals will be available on Blackboard unless otherwise noted.

LECTURES: M, W and F 10:00 to 11:05 in LSC 200. Our x-period is TH 12:00-12:50 and will be used for office hours for Professor Irwin unless otherwise noted on the syllabus. On days where x-period is used for office hours for Professor Irwin, you can find her in LSC 333. Attendance in lecture is not recorded, but your attendance is assumed because anything in lecture could be on the exams. Also, please be on time. Announcements are generally made at the beginning of class. If you are late, you may miss important information about the course. The exams will contain questions from lecture and lab. LABORATORIES: Attendance in laboratory is mandatory. Labs meet in LSC 102 beginning with the second week of class (22 September). Labs meeting on Monday run from 3-7 pm; labs meeting other days of the week run 2-6 pm. You will hear from Craig Layne, the Lab Coordinator, confirming what day you have lab. Laboratories consist of field and laboratory activities such as sample collection and enumeration, experimental manipulation, data analysis, interpretation, and discussion. You cannot make up labs. Come dressed appropriately for each week's laboratory: labs happen rain or shine, warm or cold.

1

Biology 16 Ecology

Fall 2014 Irwin

SPECIAL NEEDS: I encourage students with disabilities, including invisible disabilities like chronic diseases, learning disabilities, and psychiatric disabilities, to discuss appropriate accommodations with me after class or during office hours. Please contact me by the end of the second week of classes (26 Sept) to ensure that accommodations can be made. You may also wish to talk with your teaching assistant if laboratory accommodations would be appropriate.

RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS: I realize that some students may wish to take part in religious observances that fall during Fall term. Should you have a religious observance that conflicts with your participation in the course, please come speak with me by the end of the second week of classes (26 Sept) to discuss appropriate accommodations.

SEASONAL FLU: If you become ill and cannot make it to class, lab, an exam, etc., please email Dr. Irwin and Craig Layne and let us know that you are sick. All powerpoint files from lecture are on Blackboard (see below). For students who miss an exam due to illness, please alert me right away that you are sick, and I will find an alternative time for you to take the exam. If you must miss a lab due to illness, please alert Craig right away so we can determine how best to handle the missed lab.

EXAMINATIONS AND GRADING: For the overall course grade, the lecture material will contribute 70% and the laboratory material will contribute 30%. The breakdown of the lecture and lab assessment items' contributions to grading is listed below. The Final Exam is cumulative.

Lectures

Exam I Exam II Final Exam TOTAL

20% 20% 30% 70%

Laboratories

Phenology Data Entry Dichotomous Key Stream Hypothesis & Prediction Stream Invertebrate Paper Pine Weevil Interpretation Phenology Interpretations TOTAL

4% 4% 4% 7% 4% 7% 30%

CLASS CANVAS: We will make extensive use of the Canvas system for lecture and lab. Please regularly check Canvas for handouts, assignments, reading lists, required readings from the primary literature, and laboratory information. In particular, all lecture guides, reading assignments, and laboratory handouts will be posted on Canvas. HONOR PRINCIPLE: I take the Honor Principle very seriously. Violations have serious consequences. During exams, I suggest you use sharp pencils and an eraser. Bring your own pencil sharpener, if appropriate, and a non-programmable calculator (one that will not store formulas). This is all you may use. Everything you write must be entirely your own work. In lab, we want you to collaborate fully with fellow students while interpreting the data. But as soon as you begin writing a lab report, the writing must be entirely your own. The teaching assistants will remind you of the line where collaboration with other students ends. If you have any doubts, please ask.

2

Biology 16 Ecology

Fall 2014 Irwin

COURSE OBJECTIVES:
1. To explore the central theories and principles in ecology, and to survey the evidence that supports them. Major topics will include:
· Limits to Distribution. What determines where species do and do not occur? · Population Ecology. What determines the abundance, dispersion, age structure, and
dynamics of biological populations? · Species Interactions. What is the nature of species interactions such as competition,
predation, herbivory, and mutualism? How do these interactions influence the distributions and abundances of organisms? · Community Ecology. What determines the structure, organization, and dynamics of groups of species? · Ecosystem Ecology. How do materials and energy move through the biotic and abiotic components of ecosystems? How do organisms and abiotic factors influence the structure and function of ecosystems? · Applied issues in ecology. How do humans influence the workings of nature?
2. To participate in the process by which theories are conceived, tested, refined, and falsified. In particular, learning goals from the Student's perspective are to:
· Understand not only how the discipline of ecology works, but also how science in general works.
· Develop a broad overview of ecology, and in so doing develop an understanding of how species fit into the world around us.
· Become proficient in reading graphs, interpreting data, evaluating and manipulating simple mathematical models, and applying empirical data to evaluate theoretical predictions.
· Gain hands-on experience in what practicing scientists do in both lecture and laboratory by designing and conducting experiments, performing quantitative analyses, interpreting data, and reporting findings.

3

Biology 16 Ecology
LECTURE SCHEDULE
Day Date Topic M 15 Sept. Introduction W 17 Sept. Limits to distribution I: Physical & chemical factors Th 18 Sept. X-HOUR: no class, office hours F 19 Sept. Limits to distribution II: Species interactions M 22 Sept. Limits to distribution III: Dispersal & colonization W 24 Sept. Limits to distribution IV: Habitat selection & the niche Th 25 Sept. X-HOUR: no class, office hours F 26 Sept. Stream ecology introduction M 29 Sept. Population ecology I: Population regulation I W 1 Oct. Population ecology II: Population regulation II Th 2 Oct. X-HOUR: no class, office hours F 3 Oct. Population ecology III: Life tables I M 6 Oct. Population ecology IV: Life tables II W 8 Oct. Interspecific interactions I: Competition I Th 9 Oct. X-HOUR: no class, office hours F 10 Oct. EXAM I (material 15 Sept ­ 6 Oct) M 13 Oct. Interspecific interactions II: Competition II W 15 Oct. Interspecific interactions III: Predation I Th 16 Oct. *X-HOUR: Interspecific interactions IV: Predation II F 17 Oct. Interspecific interactions VI: Herbivory M 20 Oct. Interspecific interactions V: Mutualism W 22 Oct. In-class movie: Sexual encounters of the floral kind Th 23 Oct. *X-HOUR: no class, no office hours F 24 Oct. Species interactions models: help with problem sets M 27 Oct. Community ecology I: Biodiversity W 29 Oct. EXAM II (material 8 Oct ­ 22 Oct) Th 30 Oct. X-HOUR: no class, office hours F 31 Oct. Community ecology II: Disturbance & succession I M 3 Nov. Community ecology III: Disturbance & succession II W 5 Nov. Community ecology IV: Island biogeography Th 6 Nov. *X-HOUR: no class, no office hours F 7 Nov. *No class M 10 Nov. Community ecology V: Food webs W 12 Nov. Ecosystem ecology I: Energy & productivity I Th 13 Nov. *X-HOUR: Ecosystem ecology II: Energy & productivity II F 14 Nov. Ecosystem ecology III: Nutrient cycling I M 17 Nov. Ecosystem ecology IV: Nutrient cycling II T 25 Nov. FINAL EXAM -- 8 AM

Fall 2014 Irwin
Reading Chp 1, 4 Chp 2, 5, 7 Chp 9 Chp 8 Chp 3 Chp 10, 11 Chp 12 Chp 13
Chp 14 Chp 15
Chp 16 Chp 20 Chp 22 Chp 17 Chp 18 Chp 19, 23

4

