 Database

CS 61: Winter 2013

Systems Logistics
Instructors
Charles C. Palmer (adjunct professor) Email: ccpalmer@dartmouth.edu Office: Sudikoff 217 Office hours: via Google+ Hangout, skype, ichat, email, phone, or by arrangement.
Ray Jenkins (Teaching Assistant - TA) Email: jenkins@cs.dartmouth.edu Office: Sudikoff 110 Office hours: Tuesday and Thursday 11:50AM-12:50PM
Lectures
12: MWF 12:301:35 Location: Life Sciences Room 200 xhour: Tu 1:001:50 Location: Life Sciences Room 200
Lab access
In order to obtain access to Sudikoff after hours, and to get into the various computer labs (such as Sudikoff 001 where tripyramid is), you will need to have your Dartmouth ID card activated for the appropriate access. To do this, stop by and see the department administrative assistant (AA) at 101 Sudikoff on a weekday between 8:30am-12:00pm, or 1:00-4:00pm, and bring your Dartmouth ID card. Inform the AA that you are taking CS61, and require access to Lab 001. You will have to fill out and sign a form stating that you understand the various policies about access to the labs in Sudikoff.
Keep in mind that it may take 24 hours for access to be activated, so please plan ahead!
You will also require an account on the CS department's systems and a database account on the CS department's sunapee machine. Please complete Homework Assignment 0 to let us know what your account is, or what you would like it to be, along with some other stuff. Please do this on or (preferably) before the first day of class!

Please note that the exterior doors of Sudikoff are automatically locked after 6:00pm weekdays, and also every weekend and holiday. In addition, the laboratory doors are locked at all times. You will need your access card to pass through locked doors. Unless you can see someone inside the lab, there is no one you can contact to get after hours access to the lab.
Inclement weather
On rare occasions, Dartmouth may cancel classes or even close the campus. If this occurs, general notice will be given in three ways:
Local broadcast media; Campus-wide BlitzMail messages; and A recorded message at a College toll-free Inclement Weather Phone Line: 1-888-566-SNOW (1-888-566-7669).
Blackboard
All class information, including syllabus, reference list, assignments, grading, and announcements will be found in the CS61 course entry in the Dartmouth Blackboard system. Access to this information will be limited to those enrolled in the course. Grades and feedback for all assignments and quizes will always appear in Blackboard. In some cases an entry in Blackboard will be a URL that will take you to another subdirectory of cs.dartmouth.edu. It is acceptable for you to access that set of webpages directly if you prefer. However, don't forget to check on Blackboard for announcements via the course blog (see below)
If you are new to Blackboard, see Blackboard for Students Help.
Syllabus
Please see the syllabus for the complete list of topics that we will cover. This class is based on the instructor's experiences and the course as designed by Prof. Amit Chakrabarti, with other guidance from around the web (cited where possible).
xHours
We will use many of the x-hour periods for additional lectures, discussions, lab and help time.
Prerequisites
Successful completion of Computer Science 50 or equivalent (subject to instructor's approval).
Lecture notes
Given my writing disability, anytime I write on the board you may have trouble reading my poor handwriting! When necessary, a lecture will be supported by

lecture notes which should be available by class time.
Reading
You are encouraged to read the textbook as we proceed through the course. You are also responsible for announcements made on the class blog (in Blackboard).
Course Announcements Blog
The instructor will use the course announcements blog in Blackboard to make announcements. Students may check the blog by logging into Blackboard or by subscribing to the blog via RSS.
Help
There will be instructor and TA office hours for the course (see the top of this page). However, time with the instructor or TA can be arranged in several ways. First, many problems can be handled via email. Other discussions, including group discussions, may be better handled through the course discussion forum in Blackboard. Keep in mind that answers from the instructor or TA will be definitive.
Other options for help include Skype, iChat/iMessage, or the Hangout feature of Google+. Group or private discussions may be held in this way, including small video images. The Hangout feature does require you to be a member of Google+ and it helps if you have a webcam or Mac iSight. If you wish to join Google+ let me know and I will send you an invitation.
Grading

8 weekly homework assignments

40%

3 quizzes

30%

Final exam Class participation

30% up to 5% extra

Late assignments
To address unavoidable circumstances, you get two 2-day extensions for assignments - just advise the TA and I when you will be taking one. Use these freebies wisely--save them for circumstances such as falling ill or interviewing.
Late assignments after the two extensions will be penalized on a 10% for each 24 period (or fraction thereof) late. So if it's due at 11:50PM on 22-Jan and you submit it at 1:00AM on 23-Jan, 10% will be deducted from the final score.
 

Honor code
Dartmouth's Honor Code and policies apply to your conduct in this course.
You may discuss and help each other (e.g., help in debugging, sharing knowledge, giving moral support, getting coffee, etc.) - we promote that as the type of team spirit and joint problem solving skills. However, you cannot work jointly on coding up (i.e., writing) your assignments. You can talk, discuss solutions, even show snippets of code on the white board (not the computer) to solve a problem but you cannot jointly work on the code development and writing. Submitted code for the labs has to be yours and yours alone.
You should not read and directly incorporate solutions for assignments found on the Web (including websites for previous terms, inside or outside of Dartmouth).
The following is repetitive since you all know it but it is necessary to be explicit here (This is Prof. Campbell's version, "culled and extended from CS8 Policy on joint work"):
You would be amazed at how easy it is to tell when people work together on problem sets, particularly coding exercises. Think about the simple shell commands we run against your source code from labs and projects to compare your lab assignments and projects against every other assignment and project ever submitted since this revision of course started in 2008  it takes less that a millisecond to run these checks  no effort on our behalf. Similarly, we know how to use google too. You should not under any circumstance look at or use code from students that have previously taken this course. The message is simple  please don't make life unpleasant for all of us by breaking these rules. The penalties for cheating at Dartmouth are severe, starting with suspension and including expulsion. If you are unsure about anything, please ask.
We can assure you that violations of the Honor Code will be treated seriously.
Please let me know if you have any questions--better to be safe than sorry!
Credit your sources
Any ideas you get from other teams or any other source should be carefully cited both in the code and in the documentation.
In your assignments, list all your collaborators (e.g., "I discussed this homework with Alice, Bob, ...") and credit any sources (including code) used. You must also credit specific sources that are provided by the instructor. For example, you must credit code that we give you if it helps you with your work (either by direct use of the code, or by simply enhancing your

understanding by reading the code). References for any non-trivial algorithms you employ should be included in the code and document to ensure others will know where to learn more about it.
Special accomodations
Please let me know before the end of the second week of the term if you have any disabilities and would like me to make appropriate accommodations. All discussions will remain confidential, although the Student Accessibility Services office may be consulted to discuss appropriate implementation of any accommodation requested.
Religious observations
I realize that some students may wish to take part in religious observances that fall during this academic term. Should you have a religious observance that conflicts with your participation in the course, please come speak with me before the end of the second week of the term to discuss appropriate accommodations.
*  This course is based upon the course designed by Prof. Amit Chakrabarti . Other guidance came from Prof. Jennifer Widom's DB courses at Stanford, now available through Coursera.org . This instructor is deeply indebted to these two outstanding educators.
Back to CS61 Home Page     Adjunct Professor Charles C. Palmer     ccpalmer <at> dartmouth.edu
Document last modified: 14 January, 2013

