Government 4: Politics of the World
Fall 2012
Room: Wilson 219
Time: M,W,F 10:00-11:05am
X-hour Th, 12-1pm
Prof. John Carey Office: Silsby 226
603 646 1130 john.carey@dartmouth.edu http://www.dartmouth.edu/~jcarey/
Office hours Monday 2-3pm Tuesday 11am-noon Or by appointment
Office: Silsby 226
What we are studying and how we go about it The subject matter of Gov.4 includes democracy and authoritarianism, revolutions and social movements, political development, and the nature of political regimes and political institutions around the world. The course begins and ends with a big question: Where is democracy possible and where is it impossible? In between, we will examine three problems that afflict politics everywhere -- how to reach decisions in the face of competing demands, how to mobilize groups behind decisions, and whether authority can be exercised without being abused. By the end of the term, you will have a firm grasp of how these problems play out in a variety of political settings. Going forward, you will be able to spot these general problems in all sorts of contexts, and I hope you will draw on your experience in Gov.4 to understand how and why they arise, how they might be resolved, and the conditions under which they are unsolvable.
We will be talking, reading, and thinking about politics in a lot of places, and you will likely be pretty unfamiliar with many of them at the outset. You might find yourself wondering about basic information on a country that the assigned readings appear to take for granted, like where the place could be found on a map, or which party controlled the government from 2009-2011 (or 1949-1951). This is to be expected, so don't worry about it, but do get the information you need to make sense of whatever you don't understand.
There are a number of ways to get background information when you need it. One is to

ask me. I might know the answer, and if I don't, I can usually figure out where to find it. It is always OK to bring questions to class, and to speak up during lecture if you want further explanation of something. Alternatively, I have office hours, and check email, and I can respond to questions that way. For all its liabilities, the web (and yes, even Wikipedia) is generally a good source of basic background information on politics in various countries. On the Gov.4 BB site, you will find a section with links to sources of data and basic information on lots of the countries we will be studying. I occasionally add links when I come across something interesting, but I won't pretend it's anything like comprehensive. There's just too much out there, it changes too fast, and as time goes by it becomes clear to me that students are often better web navigators than I am. So go ahead and explore some of the sites I've suggested, find your own, and send me the URL in an email if you come across good sites that I should add to the course links.
To sum up, there is no required text whose main purpose is to deliver comprehensive background information on the politics of every country we will study. However, if you find you lack information that you need to understand the readings or lectures, you are responsible for getting it, and you have resources at your disposal to do so.
My main goals for you, over the course of the term, are for you to:
· Build a foundation of factual knowledge about politics around the world. · Master the central concepts associated with democracy and authoritarian
government, collective decision-making and collective action, and delegation of power. · Identify key questions about these concepts that are debated by scholars and demonstrate a command of the most influential answers to those questions.
Organization, Resources, and Requirements
Blackboard site If you lose your copy of this syllabus, you can an electronic copy on the Blackboard (BB) site. Slides from lectures will be posted to the site, as will any class announcements, as necessary, and your grades on completed assignments. Assigned readings, apart from the books available for purchase, are available in the Documents section of the BB site, as are optional related materials. I will also post news stories relevant to issues covered (and some not covered) in the class, as well as sample op-eds, in the Course Materials section of the BB site. You should draw on all these resources, especially as you begin to develop ideas about what to write about for your own op-eds.
Being aware of politics around the world Apart from the required readings, you should look at a good international news source on a regular basis. For Gov.4 purposes, the point is to identify connections to themes, issues, and phenomena described in class and in the assigned readings so you can locate them in a broader context. It's great if you leave Gov.4 wanting to study more political science, but I would love it if you leave with a standing interest in politics and some tools to make sense of it.
The weekly news magazine, The Economist, is an outstanding single source of international news. You can find good student deals on subscriptions ­ either electronic or print ­ at www.economist.com. Even non-subscribers can sign up for a free, weekly email from The Economist with headlines from around the world and links to some of the
2

top stories. Just scanning down that email is a useful way to get a snapshot of the biggest political developments across a wide range of countries each week.
Another very good source is the web-based Foreign Policy magazine. Apart from the magazine itself, FP puts out an email with links to top stories 4 times per week. I am pretty sure you can subscribe to this for free. I suggest going to:
http://www.foreignpolicy.com/
and clicking around until you get prompted to register.
Finally, apart from news coverage, I strongly advise you to bookmark the blog, The Monkey Cage (http://www.themonkeycage.org/) and spend a little time on there at least once a week. TMC is the best blog on the intersection between political science and politics. It's contributors are really good at bringing to bear recent scholarship, data, graphics, and debates that shed light on current and ongoing stories and topics in the news.
Assigned readings and how to get them The books assigned for the course, listed below, are available at the bookstore:
· Zakaria, Fareed. 2004. The future of freedom: Illiberal democracy at home and abroad. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
· Shepsle, Kenneth A. (2010). Analyzing politics . NY: W.W. Norton & Co. · Putnam, Robert D. (1993). Making democracy work: Civic traditions in modern
Italy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
The rest of the assigned readings are available in electronic format under Course Materials/Required Readings on the BB site. [Note that the Communist Manifesto is accessed most easily in HTML format directly on the web. The URL is listed in the section of the syllabus with full citations to these readings.]
Reading assignments are indicated on the syllabus by author's last name in the schedule of classes and assignments below. Full citations for each reading follow below that, in the order they are assigned. If you have trouble getting an assigned reading from the BB site, most of them (particularly journal articles) are available in full-text electronically via your Dartmouth account. Go the library's website and search using the information in the citation.
Supplementary readings In addition to the assigned readings, you will also find on the BB site some supplementary readings and resources. Under the Course Materials section of the BB site, in addition to the Required Readings, you will also find folders for Additional Academic Articles and Resources, and for News Articles. Over the course of the term, as I come across material of either sort that I think might be of interest to you, particularly in light of subjects already on our syllabus, I will post that material accordingly.
Assignments & Grading
The assignments count toward your grade in the following proportions:
3

· Quizzes · Exam 1 · Exam 2 · 2 Op-eds · Final exam

20% 15% 15% 20% (10% each) 30%

Quizzes Over the course of the quarter, I will give five to eight pop quizzes at the beginning of class. Quizzes should take just a few minutes, and will consist of a few basic questions about the readings on the syllabus for that day or from recent classes. I will ask about stuff that should be evident if you have done the reading for class reasonably carefully. Filling in your name will count as one question (assuming you get it right), which is to say you'll get some credit for showing up. To minimize inequities resulting from students missing a quiz due to sickness, other unavoidable absence, or something that prevents you from doing the reading before a class, each student's lowest quiz grade (e.g. a zero, if you happen to miss a class when we have a quiz) will be dropped before the quiz grade average is calculated.

If you know ahead of time that you will miss a class because of a Dartmouth-sponsored commitment (e.g. traveling with debate team, softball team, orchestra, etc.) or for some foreseeable personal commitment that is not discretionary (e.g. scheduled medical procedure would count here ­ you're going out of town to visit your sister and won't be back for Monday's class would not), and you let me know at least one class period ahead of time, you may be able to make up a quiz missed due to that absence. In this case, you will need to come to my office a few minutes before the next class and if there was a quiz the prior class, take it. In this circumstance, you are under the honor code not to find out from classmates whether a quiz was given at the class you missed. This is not an option for students who miss class for unanticipated reasons or without prior approval.

Please also note that it would be a breach of academic honor to communicate (e.g. by
text message) to alert any student not present in class that a quiz is being given on a particular day.

Exams There are three exams: two in-class exams, on September 28 and October 26, and a Final on November 16. Each exam will draw from all assigned readings up to that point. The final will inevitably focus more heavily on material from the last part of the term, given that you will already have been tested on earlier material, but the whole term is fair game on the final. Exams are generally a mixture of short answer questions (identifications, sometimes some multiple choice, as on the quizzes) and essays.

Op-eds These are opinion/editorial essays, as one would see in any newspaper. As is conventional with newspaper op-ed submissions, these essays are strictly limited to 750 words ­ no exceptions. In the top, right-hand corner of your op-ed, write your name, the date, and the total word count. Your op-ed should fit on a single piece of paper, single-spaced, front and back.

The purposes of the op-ed assignments are for you to:

· Identify unresolved questions or contentious debates in the current political context that are directly related to the broader scholarly issues raised in Gov.4.

4

· Apply concepts from Gov.4 to these questions and debates, where appropriate. · Cultivate the skill of making your case efficiently ­ articulating the central
question, its relevance, and your answer to it; summoning evidence for your position; anticipating and refuting counter-arguments ­ in the context of a short essay.
Op-eds may be turned in at any time until the last day of class, Wednesday, November 12. They should be submitted via BB site. Just click on Assignments and you will see where to upload each op-ed. For op-eds turned in by November 2, you should also send me an email to let me know you have uploaded your essay so I will know there's a new one there for me to evaluate. For op-eds turned in after November 2, do not send me the email, but do deliver a hard copy to me in class. The earlier you turn in your first oped, the more time I will have to provide feedback, which I will aim at helping you write an even better second op-ed, so there is an advantage to getting at least the first op-ed in relatively early.
Your op-ed should advance an argument about how the political world works. Think of your argument as an answer to a question over which there is some reasonable doubt or disagreement. You need to establish what is the question you are addressing, why it matters, what your answer to it (i.e. your argument) is, and why your answer is right (i.e. your evidence) -- and you need to accomplish this in short order.
If you do not do so already, you should start reading op-eds in good newspapers on a regular basis and with a critical eye. Good general outlets here include the New York Times, Wall Street Journal, Washington Post, the Economist (their editorial pieces are in their `Leaders' section), and closer to home, the Boston Globe, the Valley News, as well as various campus publications. I also recommend subscribing to the Real Clear World politics news feed (go to: http://www.realclearworld.com/subscriptions/). Like Foreign Policy Magazine (see above, on news sources), RCW will send you a daily email with headlines and links to articles it has culled from various sources. The nice thing about RCW is that it pulls op-ed pieces and groups them separately, making it easy to find examples of this particular genre.
Op-eds for Gov.4 must be on some topic that focuses primarily or exclusively on politics in a country or countries other than the United States ­ comparing aspects of politics in one country with politics in another, or describing/interpreting/evaluating a political phenomenon occurring somewhere in the world besides the United States. If you choose an op-ed topic that focuses on a single country, it must be non-U.S. If your oped topic is explicitly comparative, however, the United States may be one of your cases.
Here are some additional guidelines.
Ø You do not need to incorporate assigned readings, formulaically, into each op-ed. Certainly, op-eds should not read like book (or article) reports. Nevertheless, neither should you avoid course material. Assigned readings and lecture materials are often good fodder for op-ed topics, questions, controversies, and arguments. Indeed, if you become a connoisseur of op-eds, you will inevitably begin to notice that a fair number of them are written by academics, generally distilling their scholarship and applying it to a topical subject, or else taking issue with some argument advanced by recent scholarship.
Ø Op-eds on specific topics not directly covered on the syllabus are fair game. Some examples might be:
5

o an argument for why Egypt will or will not be able to form a stable government in the wake of the tumult of the Arab Spring;
o the motivations for ethnic-based political mobilization in Bolivia (or Ecuador, or Sudan, or Russia, or Malawi, or Iraq, or India, ...);
o the effects of devolution of political authority in the United Kingdom on education policy in Scotland;
o whether campaign finance in Japan or that in the United States is more prone to corruption.
Ø Although foreign policy (both that emanating from the United States and elsewhere) has important implications for domestic politics the world around, the focus of Gov.4 is domestic politics, not inter-state relations. Op-eds related to inter-state relations are only fair game to the extent that their primary focus is on implications for domestic politics. Some examples to clarify:
o An op-ed on whether the U.S. trade and travel embargo against Cuba makes the downfall of the Communist Party government there more or less likely, and why, is OK. An op-ed on whether the ineffectiveness of the embargo up to now undermines U.S. influence abroad is not.
o Similarly, an op-ed about how trade and investment between South and North Korea affect the likelihood for collapse of the North Korean regime would be OK. An op-ed about the mutual economic benefits of trade between North and South Korea is not OK.
o An op-ed about the forces at work that maintain Somalia as a failed state would be fair game, but one on the African Union's security interests in reestablishing a viable state in Somalia would not be.
o An op-ed about the effects of a proposed European-based anti-missile shield on US-Russian relations is not OK. One about the domestic political factors that determine approval or disapproval of such a shield in the Czech Republic (or Poland, or Ukraine, etc.) would be fine.
o An op-ed on whether U.S. drug eradication policy toward Colombia strengthens or weakens insurgent groups in that country is OK. An op-ed on whether this policy decreases the supply of drugs reaching the United States is not.
o An op-ed on the effects of German participation in NATO-sponsored peace-keeping missions in Afghanistan on campaigns and support for parties in German elections is OK. An op-ed on whether German participation in non-defensive military missions destabilizes the balance of military power in Europe is not.
To help you get you started in thinking about how to identify a topic for an op-ed, some examples from published sources, as well as a few examples of op-ed type essays I have written over the years (some published, some not), on the BB site, under the Course Materials section. As the term progresses, I will post more op-eds on current topics as I find them. Students who come across interesting op-eds on comparative politics should send them to me, so I can include them on the BB site.
Extra credit will be awarded to any student who gets an op-ed published in a competitively edited publication. The New York Times, Wall Street Journal, and Washington Post, are the gold standard here. Anyone who lands a comparative politics op-ed in one of those during this term automatically gets an A for the entire op-ed section of your grade -- plus I will buy cookies or donuts or bagels (your choice) for the entire class to celebrate. And I will do a special dance in front of the whole class in your
6

honor. The Valley News doesn't warrant quite such an elaborate celebration, but I'll still buy cookies, etc. Campus publications warrant a round of applause.
Finally, you will note that published op-eds generally don't include bibliographical citations -- at least not of the conventional academic sort. If the author is referring to a specific book or report, s/he will generally just spell out the title, source, and authorship in the text of the op-ed itself. Conversely, I do want to see citations of any sources to which you refer.
My preferred citation style for any academic work is a parenthetical reference to the author's last name and the year of the publication at the end of the relevant sentence in the text itself; then the corresponding, full bibliographical citations (name, year, title, publisher) at the end of the paper.
In the case of class papers, however, there is a limited waiver. You do not need to include a full bibliographical citation for any source that's already on the syllabus (i.e. for the required readings) because I already know those sources. So, in your op-eds, if you're making reference to a specific source, cite it parenthetically (Zakaria 2004). If it's a reading from the syllabus, that's all you need. If it's from another place, you should also include a full citation at the end of the op-ed. By the way, the citations themselves don't count against your word count, so cite as much as you need to.
If you decide to submit your essay for publication somewhere, I suspect the editor will want you to remove the citations, or else cite in a different format. The expectations about format for any specific publication are generally posted along with instructions about how to submit.
Academic integrity Students are responsible for understanding Dartmouth's academic integrity rules. These rules and principles can be reviewed at http://www.dartmouth.edu/~reg/regulations/undergrad/acad-honor.html and http://www.dartmouth.edu/~sources/. Ignorance of these principles is not an excuse if a violation occurs.
Note on religious observance Some students may wish to take part in religious observances that occur during this academic term. If you have a religious observance that conflicts with your participation in the course, please meet with me before the end of the second week of the term to discuss appropriate accommodations.
7

Date Sept.10
Sept.12 Sept.14 Sept.17
Sept.19 Sept.20
Sept.21 Sept.24 Sept.26 Sept.28
Oct.1 Oct.3
Oct.5 Oct.8 Oct.10 Oct.12
Oct.15 Oct.17 Oct.19 Oct.22 Oct.24 Oct.26
Oct.29 Oct.31
Nov.2

Schedule of Classes & Readings

Topic

Reading

Class introduction

Part I: Politics, Democracy, and the Sweep of History

Constitutional liberalism & democracy

Zakaria, Intro & ch.1-2; Doig

What states do, and fail to do.

Zakaria, ch.3-4; Herbst

Marx & Engels (sections I

The transience of liberal democracy

and II); Orwell; In Our

Time podcast

Liberal democracy, politics, and

Fukuyama; Barber;

skeptics

Huntington; Dutton

Q&A section (optional)

Part II: 3 Theoretical Problems

Aggregation

Shepsle ch.3-4

Collective action

Shepsle ch.8-10

Delegation

Shepsle ch.12-13

Exam 1

Part III: Aggregation in the real world

Electoral systems

Shepsle ch.7; ACE Project case studies

Presidentialism

Carey 2005; McConnell 2010

Carey & Reynolds 2011;

Elections and party systems

Meisburger 2012;

Reynolds & Carey 2012

Coalitions & parliamentary government Shepsle ch.16

Heterogenous societies

Posner

Federalism

Stepan; Economist 2007; Cummins (WSJ)

Part IV: Collective action in the real world

Revolutionary collective action

Kuran; Tucker 2007 & 2011

Building local democracy

Putnam 1,2

Explaining democratic performance

Putnam 3,4

Civil society and democracy

Putnam 5,6

Weaver (1995); Berman

Civil society and non-democracy

(2003); Fassihi (WSJ);

Cambanis 2010

Exam 2

Part V: Delegation in the real world

Rent-seekers and bad government

Hellman

Economic rents and regime survival: Cuba

Corrales

Rents, reforms, and regime survival: China

O'Brien & Li 2005; Shih, Adolph & Liu 2012 (selected pages ­ see full

8

Nov.5 Nov.7 Nov.9
Nov.12 Nov.16, 8-11am

Part VI: Democracy Democracy and development A crude hypothesis: Oil hurts
Not oil ­ Islam! Not Islam ­ Arabs!
Building democracy in Iraq & Afghanistan
Final exam

citation); and Liu 2011
Przeworski & Limongi Ross Fish; Stepan & Robertson; Kurzman & Naqvi Worden; Worden & Sinha; Dawisha; Khalilzad All of the above

Sept.28: Oct.26: Nov.12: Nov.16:

Summary list of important dates in Government 4
Exam 1 in class Exam 2 in class Last day to turn in op-eds Final exam

Citations for assigned readings
Zakaria, Fareed. 2004. The future of freedom: Illiberal democracy at home and abroad. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
Doig, Jameson. 2011. "Unwritten Constitutions." Encyclopedia of Political Thought. New York: Wiley-Blackwell. Forthcoming.
Herbst, Jeffrey. 1990. "War and the State in Africa." International Security 14(4):117139.
Marx, Karl and Friedrick Engels. 1848. The manifesto of the Communist Party. http://www.anu.edu.au/polsci/marx/classics/manifesto.html
[As you read the Communist Manifesto, you will see it is broken into chapters (or sections). You should focus most of your attention on the first two sections ­ `Bourgeois and Proletarians,' and `Proleterians and Communists.' The third section, on Socialist and Communist Literature, makes a lot of references to other writings that were circulating around at the time the Manifesto was written, and the references probably will not be all that interesting or enlightening to you. The fourth section is largely about the specific partisan politics of the day and the partisan strategy Marx & Engels envisioned for communists. Then, depending what website you visit, you might find a series of prefaces that were attached to subsequent printings of the Manifesto. All this can make for interesting intellectual history, but the meat of the Manifesto -- what was most influential on world politics for the next 150 year after its publication, is in sections I and II, so focus most of your attention there.]
In Our Time. 2012. Podcast from BBC on Revolutions of 1848. January 19.

9

Orwell, George. 1938. Homage to Catalonia. New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, pp.3-14.
Fukuyama, Francis. 1989. "The End of History?" The National Interest 16:3-18.
Barber, Benjamin R. 1992. "Jihad Versus McWorld." The Atlantic Monthly (March).
Huntington, Samuel P. 1993. "The clash of civilizations?" Foreign Affairs 72(3):22-49.
Dutton, Michael. 2004. "The Mao Industry." Current History 103(674):268-272.
Shepsle, Kenneth A. 2009. Analyzing Politics . NY: W.W. Norton & Co: Selections.
ACE Project. 2006. Electoral system case studies (India, South Africa, Germany)
Carey, John M. 2005. "Presidential Versus Parliamentary Government." Handbook of New Institutional Economics. Claude Menard and Mary Shirley, eds. Boston: Kluwer Academic Press.
McConnell, Shelley A. 2010. "The return of continuismo?" Current History 109(724):7480.
Carey, John M. and Andrew Reynolds. 2011. "Comparing the Arab Revolts: The Impact of Electoral Systems." Journal of Democracy 22(4):36-47.
Meisburger, Timothy M. 2012. "Debating Electoral Systems: Getting Majoritarianism Right." Journal of Democracy 23(1):155-163.
Reynolds, Andrew and John M. Carey. 2012. "Debatig Electoral Systems: Getting Elections Wrong." Journal of Democracy 23(1):164-168.
Posner, Daniel N. 2004. "The political salience of cultural difference: Why Chewas and Tumbukas are allies in Zambia and adversaries in Malawi." American Political Science Review 98(4):529-547.
http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayIssue?jid=PSR&volumeId=98&issueId=04
Stepan Alfred. 1999. "Federalism and democracy: Beyond the US model." Journal of Democracy 10(4):19-34.
The Economist. 2007. "Does independence beckon?" The Economist. September 6.
Cummins, Chip. 2007. "Hunt Oil skirts Baghdad, signs deal with Kurds." Wall Street Journal, September 10, p.A1
Kuran, Timur. 1992. "Now out of Never: The Element of Surprise in the East European Revolution of 1989." World Politics 44(1):7-48.
http://www.jstor.org/journals/00438871.html
Tucker, Joshua A. 2007. "Enough! Electoral Fraud, Collective Action Problems, and Post-Communist Colored Revolutions." Perspectives on Politics 5(3):535-551.
Putnam, Robert D. (1993). Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
10

Weaver, Mary Anne. 1995. . "The novelist and the sheikh." The New Yorker. January 30.
Berman, Sheri. 2003. "Islamism, revolution, and civil society." Perspectives on Politics 1(2):257-272.
Fassihi, Farnaz. 2007. "Cementing power: A Lebanese militant group launches rebuilding project ­ As election nears, Hezbollah gains clout across sectarian lines." Wall Street Journal, September 17, p.A1.
Cambanis, Thanassis. 2010. "Thin Line for Group of Muslims in Egypt." New York Times. September 5.
Hellman, Joel. 1998. "Winners Take All: The Politics of Partial Reform in Postcommunist Transitions." World Politics 50(2):203-234.
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/world_politics/toc/wp50.2.html
Corrales, Javier. 2004. "The gatekeeper state: Limited economic reforms and regime survival in Cuba, 1989-2002." Latin American Research Review 39(2):35-65.
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/latin_american_research_review/toc/lar39.2.html
Economist. 2008. " Why Grandpa Wen has to care." June 13.
O'Brien, Kevin J. and Lianjiang Li. 2005. "Suing the local state: Administrative litigation in rural China." Engaging the law in China: State, society, and possibilities for justice. Neil Diamant, Stanley B. Lubman, and Kevin J. O'Brien, eds. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press: 31-53.
Shih, Victor, Christopher Adolh, and Mingxing Liu. 2012. "Getting ahead in the Communist Party: Explaining career advancement of Central Committee members in China." American Political Science Review 106(1):166-187. [But Gov.4 students should focus on pp.166-171, pp.175-179, and pp.182-183.]
Liu, Xiaobo. 2011. "China's quest for democracy." Journal of Democracy 22(1):152-166.
Przeworski, Adam, and Fernando Limongi (1997). "Modernization: Theories and Facts." World Politics 49(2):155-183.
Ross, Michael L. (2001). "Does Oil Hinder Democracy?" World Politics 53(3):325-361.
Fish, M. Steven. 2002. "Islam and authoritarianism." World Politics 55(1):4-37.
Stepan, Alfred and Graeme B. Robertson. 2003. "An `Arab' more than `Muslim' electoral gap. Journal of Democracy 14(3):30-44.
Kurzman, Charles and Izlal Naqvi. 2010. "Do Muslims vote Islamic?" Journal of Democracy 21(2):50-63.
Worden, Scott. 2010. "Afghanistan: An election gone awry." Journal of Democracy 21(3):11-25.
11

Worden, Scott and Sylvana Q. Sinha. 2011. "Constitutional interpretation and the continuing crisis in Afghanistan." PeaceBrief 113. Washington DC: United States Institute for Peace. November 7.
Dawisha, Adeed. 2010. "A vote against sectarianism." Journal of Democracy 21(3):2640.
Khalilzad, Zalmay. 2010. "Lessons from Afghanistan and Iraq." Journal of Democracy 21(3):41-49.
12

Professor Carey's writing tips ­ and admonitions
Every term, I read stacks of student papers. Most are very good, but all have some shortcomings. Some of the mistakes are original, but others I see over and over. Here are a few basic writing errors I would like not to see in your papers:
"different than," "different from" · Things are different from one another, not different than one another.
"reason why" · If you are trying to explain the reason why something happened, try just explaining the reason something happened. Alternatively, you could tell me why something happened. The phrase "reason why" is redundant.
"uninterested" versus "disinterested" · People constantly use "disinterested" to mean "uninterested." These words are not interchangeable. "Disinterested" means unbiased, objective. "Uninterested" means, well, not interested. We want judges who are disinterested in the cases that come before them, but not who are uninterested. I'm not sure why so many people use "disinterested" when they mean "uninterested," but not the other way around. I suspect people who don't know the difference think that "disinterested" sounds like a `smarter' word. Incorrect usage, however, never makes anyone sound smart.
"which" and "that" · "Which" leads off a clause that adds information about a thing that has already been identified. "That" leads off a clause that identifies the thing (although it might also provide additional information about it). · Students tend to overuse "which" when they ought to be using "that." Much more rarely do I find examples of "that" used when "which" would have been correct. Therefore, I recommend you conduct a "which" hunt through your papers before turning them in. · An example: "Visitors to the Library Reserve Desk, which is located in the basement of Baker, are often surprised to find a huge mural that depicts Mexican history from the pre-Aztec period through the Revolution." · As another example, consider the difference between "The lawnmower, which is in the garage, doesn't work," and "The lawnmower that is in the garage doesn't work, but the one in the shed runs fine."
Verbs that are not verbs · "Evidence" is a noun, not a verb. As such, there is no past participle of "evidence" whereby support for a claim is "evidenced by" something. It might be "shown by" or "demonstrated by," but not "evidenced by." · "Incentive" is also a noun. When you feel tempted to say something "incentives" something else, try "motivates," or "creates incentives for."
"a whole nother" · OK, here is one I doubt you will make with the written word (although if you do, you're in deep trouble), but that has grown to such epidemic proportions in everyday speech that I have to include it. I think the error is pretty self-explanatory. I hear this everywhere lately, including among TV talking heads and on (gasp) NPR. Please avoid.
Columbia/Colombia · Columbia is a university in New York. Colombia is a country in South America.
13

