Music 32 Improvisation
Prof. Kui Dong
Course Description
"Improvisation" describes a wide variety of musical practices around the world through which musicians at least partially extemporize a musical performance. This course aims to develop skills in improvisatory music-making both through practical experimentation and exercises, and by analyzing approaches to improvisation in selected musical styles, traditions, and works, with a focus on pieces by contemporary composers and avantgarde free improvisation. For a final project, students will prepare and present a concert of improvised works. Dist: ART
Prerequisite: Music 1, or exemption from Music 1.

Week 1: Listening: Reading:
Week 2: Listening: Reading:

Syllabus
Basic study of gestures, sounds and idea development
Classic Northern Indian Music 1. Raga: Suha-Kanara 2. Tala: Tintal Stephen Slawek, (1998). "Keeping it Going: Terms, Practices, and Processes of Improvisation in Hindustani Instrumental Music." In the Course of Performance: Studies in the World of Music Improvisation, edited by Bruno Nettl with Melinda Russell, 335368. Chicago & London: University of Chicago Press.
Guest lecture: Don Glasgow on Jazz improvisation
Lab study: Barbara Coast rehearsals Octavio Paz, "The Poem: Rhythm" 46-55 John Cage, "Silence" (1961) 41-56

Week 3:

Study of short session- Free Improvisation

Practicing: Listening:
Reading:

Solo/duet/trios and larger ensemble Pauline Oliveros (20 March 2001). "Deep Listening."
A Program of the Pauline Oliveros Foundation. http://www.deeplistening.org
Wassily Kandinsky (1977 edition; first published 1914) Concerning the Spiritual in Art. Trans. M.T.H. Sadler. New
York: Dover Publications.

Project (Solo vs. Ensemble) Students are encouraged to use non-musical media such as silent film, poetry, or
painting as a starting point for the improvisation project. Each student also develops a set of ideas that shape the solo part of the improvisation.

Week 4:
Analysis: Guest Lecture: Listening:

Christian Wolff: Indeterminacy
"Exercise" by Christian Wolff Christian Wolff Christian Wolff, "Exercises" (1973-1975)

Week 5:
Listening: Reading:

Workshop with Christian Wolff
Derek Bailey: Free Improvisation Christopher Hatzis, (1998). "Ritual Versus Performance: The Future of Concert Music." Harmony, Forum of the Symphony Orchestra Institute, no. 7:80-90.

Week 6: Listening: Reading:
Week 7: Practicing: Reading:

John Zorn's Early Composition: Game Pieces
John Zorn: "Cobra" for group of improvisers and a promoter (conductor) Stephen Nachmanovitch (1990), Free Play: Improvisation in Life and Art. New York: Jeremy P. Tarcher/Putnam.
Work Study: "Cobra"
Cobra Karlheinz Stockhausen (1968). Aus den sieben tagen (from the seven days) 15 text compositions for intuitive music. Vienna: Universal Edition.

Week 8:

Work Study: "15 Text Compositions for Intuitive Music," Karlheinz Stockhausen

Week 9-10: List of work:

Concert Preparation Exercise I, V, and X, Christian Wolff
Cobra, John Zorn Group improvisation
Solo or smaller ensemble improvisation w/o image

Evaluation:
50% Class participation, musical preparation and discussion 30% Performance and presentations in Recital Hall 15% Solo project 5% 2-page Report on your approach to improvisation
CONCERT PRESENTATION: class members produce and perform the concert. You provide playbill with titles, program notes, text and the performance, plus all publicity, setup and breakdown, front-of-house, reception, etc.

