September 16, 2013
Dartmouth College Fall 2013 Professor: Melinda O'Neal Teaching Assistants: tba Class Hours and Locations: MWF 11:15am-12:20pm in Lower Buck, Music Department; X-hour Tues 12:00-12:50pm in Hartman, Music Department Office: Room 47, Music Department, Hopkins Center Phone: 603.646.2743 Office Hours: M, W, F at 4:00-5:00pm and by appointment
Music 1 Beginning Music Theory
The course objective is to provide each student with fundamental knowledge and skills for the continuing enjoyment and further study of music. Concepts and structures of melody, harmony, form, analysis, improvisation, composition and performance will be explored. Fundamentals of music notation, aural and written intervals, meter, rhythm, scales, chords, harmonic progressions, cadences, basic keyboard skills, melodic and rhythmic dictation and sight singing will be introduced and applied. Emphasis will be on music in Western European culture.
This course is not a prerequisite for the music major nor does it count toward the major or minor; it fulfills ART distributive requirement. If you plan to major or minor in music, enroll in Music 20.
Academic Honor Principle: http://www.dartmouth.edu/~uja/honor/ Sources and Citations: http://dartmouth.edu/writing-speech/learning/materials/sourcesand-citations-dartmouth
Course information, announcements and assignments will be posted on Blackboard.
Required Text Straus, Joseph N. Elements of Music (CD not required), 3rd edition. New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2011. Audio clips are posted on Blackboard. Textbook is on Music 1 reserve in Paddock Music Library.
Supplementary Texts on Reserve in Paddock Music Library Duckworth, William. A Creative Approach to Music Fundamentals. Zinn and Hogenson. Basics of Music, Opus 1. Aldwell and Schachter. Harmony and Voice Leading, Vol. 1. Kostka and Payne. Tonal Harmony. Numerous musicianship applications are available online.
Ear Training Lab and and Individual Keyboard Sessions with TA · Ear training Lab is weekly at the Tuesday noon X-hour with TA ­ required. · Individual 15-minute keyboard lessons held weekly (8 meetings) with TA ­ required until proficiency is completed. Appointments are not rescheduled.
Assignments In general, written assignments will be posted on Wednesday of each week and turned in at the beginning of class the next Monday. Assignments turned in after 11:15am Mondays will not be accepted. Assignments will be graded and returned at the beginning of the next Wednesday's class. Additional assignments beyond the textbook will be made periodically.
1

September 16, 2013

Attend Eugene Onegin by Tchaikovsky "Live at the Met" opera broadcast Sunday October 6 at 1:00pm (tickets provided) to experience opera on the big screen. Write a
one-to-two page concert reflection.

Optional for extra credit: Attend live concert by Tetzlaff Quartet on Friday October 18 at 8pm, Spaulding Auditorium, Haydn String quartet in C Major, Op. 20/2; Beethoven
String Quartet No. 15, Op. 132; Bartok String Quartet No. 4. Write a one-to-two page concert reflection.

Attend a Hopkins Center ensemble performance by either Dartmouth Symphony Orchestra, Wind Ensemble, Glee Club, Handel Society. Write a one-to-two page concert
reflection.

Keyboard Proficiency­Individual Lessons with TA
Keyboard proficiency will be graded by the TA on a per-session basis for eight sessions. By the end of the term, students will: a) play major and minor scales up to keys in four
sharps and four flats in each hand separately with correct fingering; b) play triads (major, minor, diminished, augmented) in assigned keys, each hand separately; 3) play
simple harmonic progressions involving I, IV and V chords in designated major and minor keys; d) sight-read a simple melody and bass line, L and R hands together; e) perform a selection chosen in consultation with TA. Students with piano background
may pass out of this requirement as soon as desired or opt to continue sessions throughout the term.

Ear Training Exams by TA during X-hour Labs
There will be two ear training exams scheduled during Tuesday X-hour Labs: October 15 and November 19. These will take 20 or less minutes of class time.

Written Midterm and Final Exams Midterm and final written exams will be comprehensive and include written and aural
components of the course based on daily class content, assignments, and labs. The written midterm will be Friday, October 18; final exam date and time set by Registrar.

Grading Assignments #1-8
Daily class participation Lab ear training quizzes (2)
Keyboard proficiency (8 sessions) Written concert reports Written midterm exam
Written final exam

25%
05% 15%
10% 10% 15%
20%

Practice Facilities with Keyboards · Music Department practice rooms 34D, 35A and D, 36A and D are unlocked.
· Rooms as available: Lower Buck, Upper Buck, Hartman and Studio 1 (access by button lock). See Music Department front office staff for more information and access.

Physically and Learning-Disabled Students Students with disabilities, including invisible disabilities such as chronic diseases,
learning disabilities and psychiatric conditions, are asked to discuss your circumstances with the instructor after the first class or during office hours so that appropriate accommodations may be made.

2

September 16, 2013
<<<<<<<<<>>>>>>>>>
Written Assignment Schedule­see Blackboard for Assignments Posted on Wednesdays by 4pm; due 11:15am in class the next Monday
(there will be schedule variances)
Week/Assignment 1 Post Wed September 18 (3 classes), due Mon September 23. Straus Chapter 1, Lessons 1-5; Chapter 2, Lessons 6 and 7.
2 Post Wed Sept 25 (3 classes), due Mon September 30 Straus Chapter 3, Lessons 14-17; Chapter 2 Lessons 8-10. No Lab on Thurs July 4 ­ College Holiday
3 Post Wed October 2 (3 classes), due Mon October 7. Straus Chapter 3, Lessons 18-22; Chapter 2, Lesson 11-12.
4 Post Wed October 9 (3 classes), due Mon Oct 14. Straus Chapter 4, Lessons 23-26; Chapter 2, Lesson 13. Wed October 16 review for written midterm.
Midterm for Lab Ear Training during X-hour: Tuesday, October 15
CLASS MIDTERM EXAM Friday October 18.
5 Post Wed Oct 23 (3 classes), due Mon October 28. Chapter 5, Lessons 27-30; review for midterm exam.
6 Post Wed October 30 (3 classes), due Mon November 4. Straus Chapter 5, Lesson 31; Chapter 6, Lesson 32.
7 Post Wed November 6 (3 classes), due Mon November 11. Straus Chapter 6, Lesson 33-35. Assignment #7 is the final chapter in the text.
8 Project Presentations begin Mon November 11 (3 classes) and continue November 13, 15 and 18. Review on November 18 for final written exam.
Assignment #8 is an in-class presentation by each student, not to exceed ten minutes. Aspects of melody, harmony, meter, rhythm, tempo, texture, dynamics and formal traits, as introduced in class, will be analyzed and presented. Your audience will both hear and see the music ­ provide an annotated score (including measure numbers) and/or a synopsis analysis, and audio. Music is of your choice and may be from any genre and style including an original composition. The presentation may be a recording or video or live performance.
FINAL EAR TRAINING EXAM during X-hour on Tuesday, November 19
KEYBOARD FINAL individually by appointment with TA.
FINAL WRITTEN EXAM tbd according to schedule established by Registrar.
3

