MUSIC 3 American Music
Summer 2012 Professor Theodore Levin Office Hours: by appointment
Course Description
This special summer offering of "American Music" will address one of the core aspects of music in America--and indeed, of music in all nations and cultures: the role of music in community. Using an ethnographic approach, and drawing on the cultural resources of northern New England, class members will investigate how musical activities contribute--and have contributed in the past--to communities organized around beliefs, practices, and identities expressed through religion, spirituality, ethnicity, cultural interest, and personal taste. Course work will include reading, listening, and writing assignments as well as visits to community music activities. Each class member will participate in a small-group project to produce an ethnographic account of music's role in a particular living community.
Course Requirements · Regular class attendance (see attendance policy below) · Timely completion of listening and reading assignments. · Submission of all written work in accordance with the deadlines stated in the syllabus; late submissions
may be subject to grading penalties. · Participation in a minimum of 7 of the following 10 off-campus activities:
· Shape-note sing in Sunderland, MA (Saturday, June 30, morning and first part of afternoon) · Community Dance, Peacham, VT (Tuesday, July 3, evening) · Contra Dance, Nelson, NH (Monday, 9 July or 16 July, evening) · Village Harmony concert, Strafford, VT, (Tuesday July 10, 7:30 PM) · Shaker Museum, Enfield, NH (Tuesday, July 17, morning) · Cracker Barrel Fiddler's Contest, Newbury, VT (Friday, July 20, evening) · Michèle Choinière concert of Franco-American folk music, Fairfax, VT (Wed. July 25, evening) · Weston Priory, Weston, VT (Tuesday, July 31, morning and first part of afternoon) · Fiddling jam session, Monday, (Monday, Aug. 6, Norwich, VT, evening) · Northern New Hampshire Arts Alliance (Tues., Aug. 7, Bethlehem, NH and vicinity, morning) · Opera North: "The King and I," Lebanon, NH (Wednesday, Aug. 8, 7:30 pm)
Attendance Policy Regular class attendance is essential and expected. The only excused absences from class are in the event of illness or a family emergency (if you are absent for one of these reasons, please ask your dean or a health services professional to email me confirming the reason for your absence). Attendance will be taken at random times throughout the term. Unexcused absence from class will affect the class participation component of your course grade.
Course Materials Reading Assignments: posted on Course Reserves or available on the Internet Listening Assignments: available in audio streaming format on Course Reserves under the title indicated in the syllabus.
Grading Course grades will be calculated on the basis of the assignments and percentages listed below. Criteria for grading are those stated in the ORC.
4 ethnographic vignettes based on fieldwork trips @ 15% Final music ethnography project: 30%

Class participation: 10% (attendance 5%, participation 5%)

All grading is numerical. Numerical totals will be converted to letter grades at the end of the term

according to the following scheme:

95-100: A

83-86: B

73-76: C

63-66: D

90-94: A-

80-82: B-

70-72: C-

60-62: D-

87-89: B+

77-79: C+

67-69: D+

0-59: F

Laptop Computers in Class Please refrain from using laptop computers during class meetings.

Students with Disabilities Students who may require special arrangements for completing assignments on account of a documented disability are invited to discuss their needs with the course instructor.

Music 3 and the Honor Code The Dartmouth Honor Code applies to your conduct in this course. In particular, written work submitted for grading is presumed to be your own except in the case of the group Music Ethnography project. For all writing assignments you are welcome to show a draft of your work to other Dartmouth students for critique as long as the writing is your own, both in the initial and final draft. In a footnote or Acknowledgments section, please note the name of anyone who has offered advice or critique, just as would be done in a scholarly article or book.
Distributive and World Culture Requirement This course satisfies the ART Distributive Requirement and the W (Western Cultures) World Culture Requirement. Music 3 cannot be used to satisfy other Distributive or World Culture requirements.
Learning Goals for the Course · Develop a broad familiarity with the musical geography of Northern New England · Learn about how music serves as a building block of community · Develop a more sophisticated and precise vocabulary in which to speak about music · Improve skills in critical writing · Challenge yourself to step outside your own cultural conditioning to hear sound and music through the
ears of listeners from other times and places

Course Syllabus
(Reading and listening assignments are listed under the date on which the material will be discussed)

21 June Thursday 26 June Tuesday
28 June

Introductory session: "Studying" Music
The Origins of American Music
Reading: Charles Hamm, Music in the New World, Chapter 2: "Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs in the Colonies" (24-46) [available on Course Reserves and Paddock Music Library reserve shelf]
Shape note singing

Thursday

Guest musician: Tim Eriksen Reading: Look at Wikipedia article "Shape note"

*** Saturday, 30 June: fieldtrip to Shape Note Sing in Sunderland, MA.

3 July Tuesday

New England contra-dancing and square dancing Guest presenter: David Millstone (dance caller and dance historian)

**** Tuesday, July 3: Peacham, VT: community dance called by David Millstone

5 July Thursday

New England contra-dancing and square dancing Guest presenter: David Millstone

10 July Tuesday

"World Music" as Community Singing: Village Harmony Carl Linich, Suzannah Park (tentative)

***** Tuesday, July 10, 7:30 PM: Village Harmony concert: Strafford, VT

12 July Thursday

Arts and Community in the Upper Valley Guest presenter: Margaret Lawrence, Director of Programing, Hopkins Center for the Arts Discussion of group ethnography projects

**** Monday, July 16: Nelson, NH contra-dance

17 July Tuesday

Music of the Shakers: visit to Enfield Shaker Museum Guest presenter: Mary Ann Haagen

19 July Thursday
^

Music of the Shakers (continued)
Reading: Daniel Patterson, The Shaker spiritual (excerpts) Listening: "I am Filled with Heavenly Treasures"/The Enfield Shaker Singers (M2131.S4 E64 2004) "Early Shaker Spirituals" (M2131.S4 E37 1996): "Tis the gift to be simple" Aaron Copland, "Appalachian Spring"

**** Friday, July 20th: Cracker Barrel Fiddler's Contest, Newbury, VT, 7:00 PM

24 July Tuesday

Michele Choinière: Franco-American Music from Northern New England
Reading and listening: Mademoiselle, voulez-vouz dancer?:Franco-American Music from the New England Borderlands, Smithsonian Folkways CD

**** 25 July: Michele Choinière: Fairfax VT concert, 7:30 PM

26 July Thursday

Music and Monastic Communities Reading: Willi Apel, Gregorian Chant, pp. 6-32

David Hiley, Western Plainchant: A Handbook, Chapter 1: "Plainchant in the Liturgy," pp. 1-30. Familiarize yourself with the Rule of St. Benedict

31 July Tuesday

Visit to Weston Priory, Weston Vermont Presentation by Brother Michael

2 August Thursday

Folk Music and Community Guest Presenter: Tim Eriksen

**** Monday, 6 August: fiddling jam session, Norwich, VT, 7:00 pm

7 August Tuesday

Art and Community Revitalization in Northern New Hampshire Guest Presenter: Frumie Selchen, Executive Director, The Arts Alliance of Northern New Hampshire

Note: This class meeting will take place "on site" in several communities in northern New Hampshire where the Arts Alliance is engaged in projects. Please be prepared for departure from campus at 7:00 AM. Return to campus will be no later than 12:00 PM.

***** Wednesday, 8 August: "The King and I," Opera North

9 August Thursday

Community Opera: Opera North Visiting presenter: Louis Burkot, Artistic Director, Opera North

14 August Tuesday
16 August Thursday
21 August Tuesday

Group presentations of fieldwork projects Group presentations of fieldwork projects Group presentations of fieldwork projects

