Intensive Portuguese II-III Primavera 2014 103, Dartmouth Hall

Professor Carlos Minchillo 307, Dartmouth Hall (603) 646 1371

Office hours: Modays, 5-6 pm or by appointment

I. General information

Text

Klobucka, Jouët-Pastré, Sobral, Biaji Moreira, Hutchinson, Ponto de Encontro: Portuguese as a World Language (textbook and workbook Brazilian Student Activities Manual). 2nd. edition.

Class Schedule

Master classes: M-Tu-W-Th-F: 10:00 -11 A.M. Classes are taught everyday using video and audio as part of the main methodology. It is essential for your progress that you prepare
for classes beforehand. Being absent from more than three classes and/or drill classes will reduce your participation grade, unless you have a documented health problem.

Drill classes

M-Tu-W-Th: (time to be aannonced). Drill classes typically will begin in the second week of the term. Being absent from more than three classes and/or drill classes will reduce your participation grade, unless you have a documented health problem. Students will opt for one time slots to attend all drill classes throughout the term. You are allowed to switch between
drill sections only twice during the entire term.

x-hours

Th: 12-12:50. The use of the X-hour is at the professor's discretion; please, be advised that you should keep that time available for class.

Tarefa de casa (Homework)

Homework is assigned on a daily basis. Your are expected to turn in your homework at the
beginning of each class. Homework must be tidy, stapled in order, and your handwriting must be legible. Messy homeworks will not be graded. Use a separate sheet of paper if you need more space. Late homework policy: I can accept only three late homeworks during the entire term, unless you have a documented health problem.

Audio & Video Exercises

The audio exercices on the Brazilian Student Activities Manual are available through Canvas (or alternatively, go directly to http://wps.prenhall.com/ml_ponto_de_encontro_2e/ The video exercises on Ponto de Encontro (textbook) are only available on line through
http://pushkin.dartmouth.edu/

Practice Exercises & Web Resources
Brazilian Films

Available for each chapter at http://wps.prenhall.com/ml_ponto_de_encontro_2e/
Ten films/TV series are part of the course. You can access them through a link on Canvas or through the Library web site.

Films are used as part of the evaluation process (in quizzes, exams, oral and written reports, etc.). You will have weekly assignments on the movies and we will discuss them during class. A tip: try to watch films and TV series during the weekend.

Cafezinho

On Mondays, at 4-5pm at "Ponto de Encontro", 104B Dartmouth Hall. This is a relaxed time for people interested in the Portuguese speaking world to get together and chat, while
enjoying coffee, cookies and music. The aim is to create a sense of a Portuguese-speaking community on campus. Joining Cafezinho is highly advisable but not mandatory: if you come to 7 meetings and try to speak Portuguese you will add points to your final grade.

TV GLOBO

Chanel 8 on DartTV, the Dartmouth Cable TV on line. Daily schedule is avaiable at http://tvglobointernacional.globo.com/ Students are encouraged to watch the news as weel as any other program.

1

II. Grades

· 6 tests and a Mid-Term1 · Final exam · Daily homework, other assigments2 · participation3/attendance4/ punctuality5

35% 15% 25% 25%

1 Please, contact me as soon as possible to solve your doubts and to report difficulties.
2 Homework must be turned in punctually, at the beginning of class. No excuses are accepted.
3 Includes oral participation and reports, oral performance and creativity.
4 Absence from class and drills is a serious hindrance to your progress. More than 6 absences (in total: classes/drills) will result in your being reported to your Dean. Please, notify me when an absence is unavoidable. E-mail is an easy way to announce this absence and to indicate commitment to the class. I allow three absences without penalty (you still can get an A). Note that this allowance includes classes missed due to illness, recruiting, athletics, etc., they are not "free" absences that you get in addition to absences for legitimate reasons.
5 Students should try to be on time. If you are ten minutes late you will not be allowed to attend the class.

Alphabetical grades (final):

letter   numeric   A 94 - 100 A- 90 - 93 B+ 87 - 89 B 84 - 86 B- 80 - 83 C+ 77 - 79

What  it  means  
compatible  grades  (tests,  assignments  and   exams),  high  commitment  to  the  course,  and:   turn  in  100%  of  homework;    3  absences  from   class/drill  classes.  
compatible  grades  (tests,  assignments  and   exams),  high  commitment  to  the  course,  and:   turn  in  at  least  98%  of  homework;    4  absences   from  class/drill  classes.
compatible  grades  (tests,  assignments  and   exams),  commitement  to  the  course,  and:  turn   in  at  least  95%  of  homework;    4  absences  from   class/  drill  classes.
compatible  grades  (tests,  assignments  and   exams),  commitement  to  the  course,  and:  turn   in  at  least  95%  of  homework;    5  absences  from   class/  drill  classes.
compatible  grades  (tests,  assignments  and   exams),  commitement  to  the  course,  and:  turn   in  at  least  90%  of  homework;    5  absences  from   class/  drill  classes.
compatible  grades  (tests,  assignments  and   exams)  and:  turn  in  at  least  90%  of  homework;     5  absences  from  class/  drill  classes..

letter   C
C-
D+
D
D-

numeric   74 - 76
70 - 73
67 - 69
64 - 66
60 - 63

What  it  means   compatible  grades  (tests,  assignments  and   exams)  and:  turn  in  at  least  90%  of  homework;     5  absences  from  class/  drill  classes.
compatible  grades  (tests,  assignments  and   exams)  and:  turn  in  at  least  90%  of  homework;     6  absences  from  class/  drill  classes.
compatible  grades  (tests,  assignments  and   exams)  and:  turn  in  at  least  80%  of  homework;     6  absences  from  class/  drill  classes.
compatible  grades  (tests,  assignments  and   exams)  and:  turn  in  less  than  80%  of  homework;   >  6  absences  from  class/  drill  classes.
compatible  grades  (tests,  assignments  and   exams)  and:  turn  in  less  than  80%  of  homework;   >  6  absences  from  class/  drill  classes.

III. Notes
If you feel any special difficulties during this course, please contact me at once and/or ask for support at the Learning Disability Center.
Should you have a religious observance that conflicts with your participation in the course, please come speak with me before the end of the second week of the term to discuss appropriate accommodation.
Please note the Dartmouth College honor code and plagiarism/cheating policy in the current catalogue. Plagiarism will result in an F grade in the course. Use caution in your work, and consult me, your Dean etc if you have any questions or concerns etc.
Cell phones: please turn off your cell phones while in class. Not even texting is tolerated.

2

V. Ponto de Encontro methodology
Integrated Media Program
Ponto de Encontro offers a comprehensive and integrated audiovisual program featuring audio recordings, a
video, and a companion website. Abundant and varied audio recordings accompany thematically contextualized listening comprehension activities in the main text and and in the Student Activities Manual. The video program, which also builds on the thematic and cultural focus of successive chapters, is integrated with the course through the Vídeo boxes, which follow Vamos viajar segments in the textbook, and through comprehension activities in the video section of the Student Activities Manual. The companion website expands the scope of guided Internet research activities included in each chapter and offers additional opportunities for the exploration of electronic resources for language learning and cultural understanding.
Organization of the Text
Ponto de Encontro consists of a preliminary chapter (Primeiros passos) and fifteen regular chapters. Through
a functional selection of language features supported by a variety of visual stimuli, the Primeiros passos chapter allows instructors to conduct classes in Portuguese from the very first day. Each regular chapter maintains the following consistent structure:
À primeira vista. This opening section of each chapter provides a richly contextualized, culture-based
framework for learning and practicing new language. New material is presented within two or three thematic groupings, which make use of photos, illustrations, and authentic documents. Comprehensible input is provided through a wide variety of language samples (dialogues, brief narratives, captions, advertisements, etc.). Within each thematic grouping, activities provide opportunities to practice new vocabulary and in some cases preview grammar points that are formally presented later in the chapter. Following the thematic presentations, the Para escutar listening activity recycles vocabulary in an authentic conversational framework, while building listening comprehension skills. Throughout À primeira vista, vocabulary is presented in both the BP and EP variants, while contextualized language samples feature the culturally appropriate variant, in most cases Brazilian Portuguese.
Estruturas. The Estruturas sections consist of concise grammar explanations focused on usage, which are
followed by immediate practice of each new structural item within a contextualized framework. The exercises and activities in this section develop students' abilities to use linguistic structures for direct communicative purposes. Contextualized and personalized, the exercises focus students' attention on a variety of useful tasks and provide practice for communicating effectively in pairs or small groups in a variety of real-life situations.
These activities reinforce the vocabulary introduced in the À primeira vista section of the chapter as well as vocabulary presented in previous chapters. Grammar explanations in Estruturas present both the BP and the
EP usage, while student activities are uniform where possible and divided into two separate tracks where necessary. In their communicative practice, students are never required to acknowledge or negotiate the language variant they are not actively studying.
Vamos viajar. Interspersed throughout the Estruturas sections, the Vamos viajar segments (two per
chapter) integrate cultural understanding with structurally targeted language practice and consist of short, culturally relevant readings relating to the theme of each chapter, followed by corresponding activities. The readings expand the thematic scope of the chapter by allowing for a more elaborate exploration of cultural, social, and political realities of Portuguese-speaking countries. The activities, some of which are structured and some open-ended, emphasize comprehension and comparing the environments and experiences of U.S. students with those discussed in the reading, while retaining as much as possible the focus on the grammar
point or points introduced in the preceding Estruturas segment(s).
Encontros. Skills and topics are again interwoven at the end of each chapter into a series of skill-building and
skill-chaining activities that bring together the chapter vocabulary, structures, and cultural content:
· Para escutar develops students' ability to understand spoken Portuguese in a variety of authentic
contexts: brief exchanges and longer conversations between two or more speakers, telephone messages, radio broadcasts, literary texts, etc. Approximately 70% of the recordings are in Brazilian Portuguese and 30% in European Portuguese.
· Para conversar includes open-ended speaking activities based on naturally occurring discourse
situations and authentic written texts. Students learn to express and discuss their own needs and interests. This section provides many opportunities for personalized expression beyond the more targeted and form-focused
communicative activities included in À primeira vista, Estruturas and Vamos viajar. · Para ler teaches students how to become independent readers by introducing basic strategies for understanding the general meaning of a text as well as for extracting specific information. A comprehensive 3

apparatus of pre-, during-, and post-reading activities guides students to develop their ability to read a variety of authentic texts in Portuguese, from simple documents such as advertisements to the extended discourse of brochures, newspaper and magazine articles, letters, literary texts, etc. While favoring Brazilian Portuguese, the
Para ler section also exposes students to texts written in European Portuguese, with the aim of developing an
interpretive competence matching the variety of real-life Portuguese language sources students are likely to
encounter outside of classroom. · Para escrever provides step-by-step activities in which students learn to compose messages and
memos, postcards and letters, journals, simple expository paragraphs, and brief essays. Pre- and post-writing activities guide students through critical steps in the writing process, including brainstorming (to develop ideas for topics); defining one's purpose, means of communication, tone, and reader; making an outline; revising; and
conferencing and peer editing. Horizontes. This section focuses on exploring the geographic and cultural diversity of the Portuguese-
speaking world through a combination of textual and visual elements. Topics are integrated into a geographically defined sequence continuing through the volume, in which students explore the Portuguesespeaking world step by step, beginning with cities and regions of Brazil, and continuing through Portugal, Angola, Cape Verde, Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau, São Tomé and Príncipe, East Timor, and Portuguese-
language communities in the United States. Para responder segments test comprehension and invite students
to explore the various aspects of the cultures studied, as well as confront them with the learners' own culture. Additionally, students are encouraged to expand the scope of cultural information presented in the readings
through navigation of the Internet: targeted web-surfing assignments are given in the Para navegar sections that follow the essays. Following the principle of cultural contextualization, the essays of Horizontes are
composed in the linguistic variant of the respective country (BP for Brazil and EP for Portugal, Lusophone Africa and East Timor).
Vocabulário. The vocabulary list includes all new, active vocabulary words and expressions presented in the
chapter in clear, semantically-organized groups. All words included in the list are practiced and recycled throughout the chapter and in subsequent chapters in a variety of contexts. Written vocabulary practice appears
in the À primeira vista sections and in the accompanying Student Activities Manual, and a recording of all
active vocabulary is included in the audio program and on the companion website.
4

