PSYC 50.1 

NEUROSCIENCE OF MENTAL ILLNESS 

 

Psych 50.1, Winter 2014

MWF 12:301:35pm 

110 Moore Hall

Xhour:  Tues. 11:50pm 

 

Contact Information 

Professor:  Margaret Funnell, Ph.D. 

Offices: 

204 Parker House 

Phone: 

6461196 

Office hours:  Monday & Tuesday. 23pm or by appointment 

 

Prerequisites 

Students must have taken ONE of these three courses in order to enroll in this class:  Psych 6, 

Psych 26, or Bio 34. 

 

Course Goals 

The goal of this course is to explore the neuroscience of mental disorders.  The ways in which 

we conceptualize and categorize psychopathology is changing rapidly, particularly as we gain 

insights into the neurological correlates of mental illness.  We will review the characteristics of 

specific mental disorders and then delve into current neuroscientific research.  We will focus in 

particular on the fundamental processes underlying psychopathology so that we can gain a better 

understanding of possible relationships between seemingly disparate disorders.  Although the 

class is focused on neuroscience, mental disorders cannot be fully understood without 

considering the experience of those suffering from these disorders.  To better understand the 

experience of mental illness, we will watch a series of films and read a personal account of 

mental illness.   

 

Readings 

We will be reading sections of an Abnormal Psychology textbook and a personal account of 

bipolar disorder.  The textbook will give you basic background about the disorders, but the 

primary readings will be journal articles.  The tests will be on material covered in the articles and 

in class, and NOT on material in the textbook.  If you have a different Abnormal Psychology 

textbook, that's fine.  Note that if you plan to take the Psychology section of the GRE, it will be 

important for you to study the textbook (or take the Abnormal Psychology class).  The material 

covered in this class will not prepare you for all of what the psychology GRE covers.  For 

example, we will not be covering Freud, psychoanalysis, behaviorism, etc. 

 

Abnormal Psychology, by Rosenberg & Kosslyn (2011), Worth Publishing. 

 

Madness: A Bipolar Life, by Marya Hornbacher (2008), Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. 

 

Journal articles:  links to articles and/or pdf's of the articles will be posted in Canvas. 

 

** Note that the textbook is available from Wheelock Bookstore, but you will need to order 

Madness on your own.  Please plan ahead so that you have a copy by the start of the term. 

1   

PSYC 50.1 
  Policies    Disabilities: Students requiring disabilityrelated accommodations must register with the Student  Accessibility Service office.  Once SAS has authorized accommodations, students must show the  originally signed SAS Accommodations/Consent Form and/or a letter on SAS letterhead to their  professor.  As a first step, if students have questions about whether they qualify to receive  accommodations, they should contact the SAS office.  All inquiries and discussions about  accommodations will remain confidential.     Honor code:  All written assignments and exams must be your own work with the appropriate  and correct citations.  For information on how to cite sources correctly, see Sources, Their Use  and Acknowledgment, which can be found on the web at www.dartmouth.edu/~sources.  I  encourage you to discuss the topics and issues raised in class with your classmates, but all work  handed in for grading must be your own.  In terms of the papers, they must be written  specifically for this class ­ you may not submit a paper you have previously submitted for credit  in another class.     Deadlines:  Extensions will not be granted for any reason.  Points will be deducted for each day  an assignment is late.    Religious observances:  Some students may wish to take part in religious observances that occur  during this academic term.  Should you have a religious observance that conflicts with your  participation in the course, please come speak with me before the end of the second week of the  term to discuss appropriate accommodations.    Canvas:  Although I will hand out a paper syllabus the first day of class, the purpose of that is to  give you an overview of the class.  Throughout the term, you should refer to Canvas rather than  the paper syllabus for the most current information on course schedule, readings, and  assignments.  Be sure to check the course Canvas site regularly!      Course Structure    The first half of the course will cover the basic areas of mental illness, and the second half will  explore mental illnesses involving dysfunction that incorporates multiple elements of the basic  areas we covered in the first half of the course.  Note that we will regularly be using the xhour  for the films, so please do not schedule other activities during this time.    Topics:  Regular class meetings (MWF) will be focused on the specific mental disorders listed in  the course schedule.  You are expected to have done the reading before class so that you are  prepared to follow the presentation and can participate with comments and questions.  The focus  of the class is on the neuroscience of mental disorders, but you need to learn about the mental  disorders themselves in order to delve into the neuroscience of the different disorders.  The  textbook will give you basic background about the disorders, and we will be reading journal 
2   

PSYC 50.1 
articles to better understand the neuroscience of the disorders.  I will generally use powerpoint  during these classes, and I will post pdf's of the powerpoints on the Canvas site after class.    Films:  I have made an effort to pick films that are interesting and enjoyable to watch.  You will  not need to take notes nor will you be tested on the material in the films.  The purpose of  watching them is to give you a better sense of the disorders we will be studying.  I suggest that  you view the films during the xhours on Tuesdays, and there will be a signin sheet for each  film.  If you are not able to attend a film during one of the xhours, all of these films are  available to you via video streaming from Jones Media.  If you view the film on your own, you  will need to submit a twopage (doublespaced) commentary about the film in order to get credit  for viewing it.  Those commentaries are due by noon on the Friday following the xhour in the  week in which the film was shown.  Your commentaries should not be a summary of the film but  rather focused on relating the film to some aspect of the neuroscience of the mental disorder  covered in the film.     Discussions:  Many of the topics we will cover in class, in the readings, and in the films are  conducive to discussion.  You are all encouraged to ask questions, raise issues, and introduce  discussions during class time.  With 35 students, however, it is difficult to involve everyone in  discussions during class.  For this reason, there will also be other discussion elements for the  class (see below).  Everyone is expected to participate in some way, but this will only work if  you do the readings on time and put some thought into the material. 
1.  Preclass questions and comments:  in the first half of the course, there are 8 opportunities to  submit questions and comments about the material prior to class, and you are expected to do this  4 times.  You may submit questions and comments about the material we just covered in class or  about the material we will be covering in the next class.  There is no set format for these, but  here are some suggestions:  
 something you found particularly interesting   something you didn't understand   an idea or insight you had about how the concepts apply to another disorder, to how the 
brain works, or to "real life" 
2.  Group discussions:  in the second half of the course, three of the Friday classes will be  devoted to group discussions.  You will be assigned to groups, and each group member will be  assigned a different article.  During class, group members will share the concepts and content of  their article with the rest of the group, and then the group will discuss how the articles relate to  the given topic or theme.  For the last 15 minutes of class, the groups will come together to have  a class discussion of overall conclusions and questions resulting from small group discussions. 
3.  Canvas discussions:  this allows you to carry on discussions outside of class.  Postings can be  on anything related to what we are covering in class or mental illness in general, and they should  show some level of thought and engagement.  The format is openended  you can introduce  topics or respond to the postings of others.  For example, you can pose a question on something  you didn't understand in the reading, suggest an experiment that might reveal something new  about a disorder, comment on similarities and differences between disorders, reflect on the  impact of a disorder on the patient or family, suggest an idea for how a disorder might be  managed or treated, or post an article or video clip that is relevant to the topic (along with a 
3   

PSYC 50.1 
comment about why it is relevant).  In order to generate some class interaction, some of your  postings should be responses to the postings of others.   
4   

PSYC 50.1 

Grading 

 

Exams:  There will be two exams, one in the middle of the term during class time and the other 

during final exam period.  The final exam will not be cumulative in terms of specific topics, but 

you will find that many of the concepts we discuss in the first half of the course will also come 

up again in the second half of the course.  The tests will include a variety of question types to 

give students multiple formats in which to convey their knowledge and understanding. 

 

Papers:  There will be two short papers on topics of your choice, although the topics must be 

primarily based on neuroscience.  You may choose to explore one mental disorder in depth or 

you may choose to compare and contrast two or more mental disorders.  If you do the latter, be 

sure that you don't sacrifice depth for breadth.  Papers are expected to be 46 doublespaced 

pages (your list of references are not included in the page count).  Specific guidelines for the 

papers as well as a grading rubric are posted on Blackboard, and papers will be submitted via 

Blackboard. 

 

Paper feedback:  Students will be assigned to groups and will provide feedback to group 

members on their papers.  It is important to take this assignment seriously, as each of you will be 

making revisions based on your classmates' feedback and will submit the revised version to me 

for grading.  Specific guidelines for how to provide feedback will be posted on Canvas. 

 

Participation:  Participation points will be assigned based on your participation in class, the 

Canvas discussion, and the Friday group discussions. 

 

Grading: 

Percent Points 

Midterm exam 

20%  100 

Final exam 

20%  100 

Paper 1 

16%  80 

Paper 2 

16%  80 

Paper feedback 1 

4%  20 

Paper feedback 2 

4%  20 

Film attendance or commentaries 

6%  30 

Participation 

14%  70 

 

 

5   

PSYC 50.1 

Course Schedule 

 

This is a tentative outline of topics (films are in gray font).  Canvas will have the most current 

schedule and will list readings for each topic.  

  

 

Monday

Tuesday

Wednesday

Friday 

Jan. 610 

Intro 

  

Etiology &  categorization 

Autism 

Jan. 1317 

Autism 

Children of the  Stars 

Schizophrenia 

Schizophrenia 

Jan. 2024  Jan. 2731  Feb. 37 

NO CLASS:  MLK day 
Anxiety  disorders 
Review 

A Brilliant  Madness 
Obsessed 
  

Depressive  disorders 
Obsessive  compulsive  disorder 
TEST 1 

Bipolar disorders 
Dissociative  disorders 
NO CLASS:  Winter Carnival 

Feb. 1014 

OC spectrum  disorders 

Hoarders 

OC spectrum  disorders 

Discussion 

Feb. 1721 

Addiction 

Intervention 

PTSD 

Discussion 

Feb. 2428 
March 37   

Eating disorders  Thin  Borderline PD   

Suicide  Psychopathy 

Discussion 
Wrapup & final  review 

6   

