Summer 2012 Forms of Therapy

PSYC 054 -2A T,TH 2:00 ­ 3:50PM xPeriod W 4:15 - 5:05PM
Instructor
Dr. Bill Hudenko Office: 141B Phone: 603-277-9110 Email: william.j.hudenko@dartmouth.edu Office Hours: Tuesdays 2-3, or by appointment
Required Textbook
Prochaska, J. O., & Norcross, J. C. (2010). Systems of Psychotherapy: A Transtheoretical Analysis 7th Ed. Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole, Cengage Learning. ISBN-13: 978-0495601876
Selected Readings
Most articles selected for class will be available on Blackboard for download. It is expected that you will download and read these articles before class. Those articles that are not in pdf format will be printed and distributed in class prior to their due date.
Course Resources
Blackboard: http://blackboard.dartmouth.edu
Course Objectives
The primary objectives of this course are introduce you to the various scientifically validated modalities of individual psychotherapy, and to explore perspectives regarding clinical change and psychopathology. Over the course of the semester we will be covering some of the most fascinating topics in the field of clinical psychology including: ethics, human connection, empathy, emotion, pharmacological treatments, and methods of evaluating the outcome of treatment interventions.
Student Accommodations
In compliance with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans with Disabilities Act, reasonable accommodation will be provided to students with documented disabilities on a case-by-case basis. Students must register with Student

Forms of Therapy -Syllabus Summer 2012

1

Summer 2012 Forms of Therapy

Accessibility Services and provide appropriate documentation to the College before any academic adjustment will be provided.
Attendance/Participation
Attendance is expected. Participation in class will consist of 10% of your course grade. Lectures expand on information in the text but also include material not covered in the text. If you must miss a class, arrange to have someone take notes for you.
Reading Assignments
Unless you are specifically told otherwise, you are responsible for reading all of the assigned material. Although the lectures will usually only cover subtopics within each reading, all readings and class materials (including handouts and demonstrations) may be covered on exams. It is expected that you will come to class prepared. This preparation will help you take notes, integrate information, ask more informed questions, and participate in class discussions.
Online Discussions
Before every class you are required to login to Blackboard and post one original question for each article/chapter regarding the class material for the upcoming class (this means if there are 3 assigned articles for one day you should have 3 questions!). Questions are due 2 hours before each class period. Your questions should reflect an effort toward critical thinking about the class material. These questions will be used as the basis for much of our class discussion. Each set of questions you post at least 2 hours before class is worth 4 points (for a total of 72 points over the semester). You are allowed to miss 1 set of questions without penalty. You may login to Blackboard and view the discussion board for sample questions. If your question does not sufficiently demonstrate that you a) read the article or b) thought critically about it, I may ask you to rewrite it for credit within 48 hours.
Exams & Written Assignment
Two exams will be given. Each exam will have a similar format and will consist primarily of short answer essays. Each exam will cover material presented as part of lectures, videos, and readings. Although some questions will be unique to the text materials (i.e., will not be discussed in lecture), the content assessed by the majority of questions will be discussed in class. The best way to use the text for exam preparation is to be familiar with all of the material, but focus on the overlap between text and lecture topics. The writing assignment for the class will require you to produce a short paper (10-15p.) regarding a personal change that you have attempted over the course of the semester. You may choose almost any behavior to change (smoking, procrastination, biting your nails, assertiveness, etc.). Your paper should focus on the relevant principles discussed in class that you applied to enact this change and the difficulties that you encountered while attempting to change it. Further details about the paper content will be provided in class. NOTE: You are not required to provide personal information in this paper. The intention of this assignment is to help you integrate class material with your personal experience. If you do not feel comfortable sharing information about yourself please let me know and I will provide you

Forms of Therapy -Syllabus Summer 2012

2

Summer 2012 Forms of Therapy

with a modified paper topic to assess your knowledge of course material. Only I will read your papers. Your grade will be penalized by 5% for each day it is late after the due date. No paper revisions are possible after their submission.
Makeup Exams

Makeup exams will be available for students who provide a valid reason for not being able to take an exam at the scheduled time. This sometimes requires official documentation explaining why it was not possible to take the scheduled exam (e.g., a doctor's note). You should inform me of an exam conflict before the exam date. Once approval to reschedule the exam is given, you should agree on a makeup time with me.
Grading

Your course grade will be computed as follows:

Class participation: Online Discussions: Paper: Exam I: Exam II:

10% 20% 20% 25% 25%

Each exam is worth 90 points. Class participation is worth 36 points. Online discussions over the course of the semester are worth 72 points. The final paper is worth 72 points. Your final grade will reflect the combined total of points (out of a possible 360) received for each item. I prefer not grade on a "curve." If the class as a whole performs poorly on particular test questions, I may decide to drop those questions and prorate test scores accordingly.

Extra Credit

If you would like extra credit, you can receive one extra credit point for each follow-up response to another student's question that you add on Blackboard. In order to receive credit, your response must be thoughtful and well-reasoned (but it needn't be correct). You may obtain a maximum of 10 extra credit points over the course of the semester (limit one per day).

Forms of Therapy -Syllabus Summer 2012

3

Summer 2012 Forms of Therapy

Assignments
TH 6/21 SAT 6/23
T 6/26
W 6/27
TH 6/28 T 7/3
TH 7/5
T 7/10 W 7/11 TH 7/12 T 7/17 TH 7/19 T 7/24
TH 7/26

Principles of Change Human Interaction & Building Rapport Text: pp. 1-23 Article: What clients find helpful in psychotherapy... (Levitt et al.) Article: Standard posture, postural mirroring... (Sharpley et al.) A Primer on Efficacy vs. Effectiveness Article: The effectiveness of psychotherapy... (Seligman) Article: Meta-analysis of therapy outcome studies (Smith & Glass) Assessment & Treatment Planning Article: Clinical significance: A statistical... (Jacobson & Truax) EXTRA CREDIT Article: Clinical vs. actuarial... (Dawes & Meehl) Ethics of Psychotherapy Book Chapter: A framework for ethical... (Haas & Malouf) Person-Centered (Humanistic) Psychotherapy Article: The necessary and sufficient conditions... (Rogers) Text: pp. 129-159 Text: pp. 94-128 Empathy & Emotion Article: Information function of empathic emotion.. (Batson et al.) Book Chapter: Excerpts from Emotions Revealed (Ekman) Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy Text: pp. 24-44 A Primer on Interpretation Chapter: Recommendations to physicians... (Freud) Psychoanalytic/ Psychodynamic Psychotherapies Text: pp. 45-93 EXAM I Health Care Today Article: Is three a crowd?... (Cohen et al.) Interpersonal Psychotherapies Text: pp. 194-218 Article: Is IPT time-limited psychodynamic... (Markowitz) Article: A systematic review of research... (Mello et al.) Behavioral Psychotherapies & Manualized Treatment Article: Clinical observation, inference... (Nurius & Gibson) Article: Manipulation of self-destruction... (Lovaas & Simmons)

Forms of Therapy -Syllabus Summer 2012

4

Summer 2012 Forms of Therapy

T 7/31 TH 8/2 T 8/7 TH 8/9 T 8/14 W 8/15 TH 8/16 T 8/21 TH 8/30

Exposure Psychotherapies Text: pp. 219-242 Text: pp. 243-294 Article: The Evolution of Psychotherapy... (Scaturo) Cognitive-Behavioral Psychotherapies Article: Elements of the Socratic Method...(Overholser) Article: Common patterns of deductive... (Moore & Noel) Text: pp. 295-334 PAPER DUE Gestalt & Experiential Psychotherapies Text: pp. 160-193 Article: Gestalt therapy, past... (Wagner-Moore) Gender-Sensitive & Multi-Cultural Psychotherapies Text: pp. 375-398 Text: pp. 399-431 Article: New voices, new visions. (Brown) Pharmacological Treatments Article: The relationship between psychotherapy... (Sarwer-Foner) Article: Combining pharmacotherapy... (Wright & Hollifield) Article: Adding psychotherapy to pharmacotherapy... (Glick) Guest Speaker: Psychiatrist from DHMC Integrative & Eclectic Psychotherapies Text: pp. 454-484 Termination Article: Strategies for reducing... (Ogrodniczuk et al.) Article: Termination from a Psychoanalytic... (Curtis) Article: A Cognitive-Behavioral Perspective... (Goldfried) FINAL EXAM AT 8:00AM (assessing material from 7/19-8/21)

Forms of Therapy -Syllabus Summer 2012

5

