Introductory Psychology 

Syllabus 

Fall, 2012 

 

Psychology 1 is designed to familiarize you with the broad scope of contemporary scientific 

psychology.  To this end, the course is structured to assist you in reaching three goals: 

 

A.  Content:  Concepts and Data  the acquisition of knowledge about the major ideas and 

findings in psychology. 

 

B.  Methods  an understanding of the methods of obtaining objective scientific data in 

psychology. 

 

C.  Applications  an ability to integrate the basic findings of psychology and relate them to other 

areas of inquiry as well as to events in your own life. 

 

In reaching the goals of the course you will have available to you the following: 

 

A.  Instructors.  There will be four instructors in the course.  In this way, we will maximize the 

breadth of your exposure to the various styles, methodologies, areas of interest, and goals of 

psychologists within the department and psychology. 

 

Professor Todd Heatherton (course chair)

353 Moore 

Professor Bradley Duchaine

450 Moore 

Professor Howard Hughes

351 Moore 

Professor Thalia Wheatley

354 Moore 

 

B.  Class Meetings.  Class will meet in Filene Auditorium (Moore Hall) on Monday, Wednesday, 

and Friday, from 10:00 am to 11:05 am, and occasionally during Xhours, on Thursday, at 12:00 

pm to 12:50 pm (you will be notified in advance in class if xhours are to be used). 

 

Exams will be held in Filene Auditorium (Moore Hall) during regularly scheduled class hours. 

 

During class meetings we will present a series of lectures and demonstrations about fundamental 

areas of psychology.  These areas are chosen to reflect each instructor's particular field of 

expertise and to allow each instructor to discuss topics that she or he feels to be most exciting 

and important.  The lectures will not review the text, but will supplement, integrate, critically 

examine, or otherwise relate to the text.  You are encouraged in your work outside class meetings 

to make your own synthesis of the lectures and readings, much as you will do with all the 

material you will encounter beyond this course. 

 

C.  Readings.  You will find in the bookstores and should purchase the following textbook: 

Psychological Science (4th Edition) by M. Gazzaniga, T. Heatherton & D. Halpern.   Note that 

the book is substantially changed from the 3rd edition. 

 

D.  Conferences.  At various times you may have questions about the course.  You should direct 

questions about the general administration of the course or about your presence at exams to the 

Chair of the course, Professor Heatherton.   

 

1   

Questions about individual chapters of the text, the content of specific exams, or lectures should 

be directed to the instructor responsible for that particular part of the course.  

 

You should also check the Blackboard web site for announcements, test grades, and other 

information concerning the course. Some instructors will post their slides or other materials to 

Blackboard.  Grades for exams will also be posted on Blackboard. 

 

Note: Any student with a documented disability needing academic adjustments or 

accommodations should speak with the Chair of the course at least 3 days before the first exam, 

which is on Wednesday, September 26th.  All discussions will remain confidential, although the 

Academic Skills Center may be consulted to verify the documentation of the disability. 

 

E.  Evaluation.  Exams will be used in this course to assess the level of performance you have 

reached in light of the course goals. 

 

There will be four onehour term exams and a onehour final.  Each of the term exams will be 

composed of fifty multiplechoice questions (approximately 35 questions from the textbook and 

15 questions from the lectures).  The tests will cover both the class meetings and the readings 

and will include only the material subsequent to the previous exam (i.e., term exams are not 

cumulative). Some questions may overlap lectures and texts, although students are 

responsible for the material from both.  Individual instructors will provide more details 

about their midterm exams. 

 

The final exam will be composed of fifty multiplechoice questions and will be cumulative, 

covering all parts of the textbook (note: not lectures).  The final exam will be given on Friday, 

November 16th at 8:00 am, along with the fourth hourly exam.  

 

Your final grade in the course will be determined by the sum of your scores on the four term 

exams and the final. Note that because of the option to earn extra credit points (see Tpoints 

below) grades will not be rounded up to the next level.  You earn two points for each correct 

answer on the exams.  Thus, the total possible point total is 500 (if you received 100% on each 

exam.) 

 

465 = A  (approximate average of 93%) 

450 = A  (approximate average of 90%) 

435 = B+  (approximate average of 87%) 

415 = B 

(approximate average of 83%) 

400 = B (approximate average of 80%) 

385 = C+ (approximate average of 77%) 

365 = C

(approximate average of 73%) 

350 = C (approximate average of 70%) 

300 = D

(approximate average of 60%) 

Below 300 = E 

 

A student will only be excused from an exam on the basis of a written note from a dean, doctor, 

or supervisor of an official collegesponsored event being held offcampus that requires the 

student's absence.  Any student seeking an excused absence from an exam must have the prior 

approval of the Chair of the course and is expected to take a makeup exam.  The makeup exam 

will be scheduled at 8:00 am on the morning of the next scheduled class.  If the student is unable 

to take the makeup because of illness or participation in college sponsored events, then he or she 

2   

will be assigned, for the missed test, a score equal to his or her lowest earned score (based on the  percentile) from the other exams.  Such prorating may be done for only one exam additional  missed exams will be counted as unexcused.  Any exam missed without an accepted excuse, as  described above, will be given a score equal to chance performance (usually 25%) or two points  below the lowest score earned by students who took the exams, whichever is lower.  Incompletes  can only be granted under very unusual circumstances and can only be granted by the Chair of  the course, upon the recommendation of a Dean.    You may receive potential extra credit towards your final grade by acquiring Tpoints (see the  descriptions of Tpoints in the next section of this syllabus).    It is a violation of the Dartmouth Honor Code to receive from or give to another person (a)  any academic assistance during an exam, or (b) any information about the actual contents  of an exam (this includes removing an exam from the testing situation OR studying from  an exam or copy of an exam that has been removed from the testing situation or from the  department OR altering an exam after it has been handed back).    F.  TPoints.  Many faculty, graduate students, and Honors Majors in our department conduct  research with human participants.  You can learn more about psychology by serving as a  volunteer in this research.  To encourage such participation, we offer extra credit toward your  final grade.   
Each hour of participation will be worth one (1) Tpoint, and you will receive onehalf (1/2)  Tpoint for periods of time less than half an hour.  Your credits are limited to a total of eight (8)  Tpoints.  Each Tpoint is worth 2.5 points added to your grade for a maximum of 20 points.  For  example, 8 Tpoints would provide 20 grade points and bring a grade of 405 (B) to a grade of  425 (B).      Tpoints do not influence our setting of grading criteria.  They are added to your final grade after  our criteria are applied.  Thus, in the setting of grades they may help those who decide to obtain  them, but they do not hurt those who do not seek them.  For those students who are unwilling or  unable to participate in experiments, an alternative activity is available in the form of  summarizing and critiquing approved research articles.  These readings are available for a  limited time from each instructor during the period in which they are in the classroom for the  course.  For additional details, contact the chair of the course.    In order to signup and receive credit for participating in experiments you will need to register  with our webbased system (www.experimetrix2.com/dartmouth).   Instructions on how to use  this site will be provided in class and on Blackboard.  Please do not register until you are  provided with instructions.    You should be aware that Tpoint opportunities typically decrease drastically near the end of the  term.  Signing up earlier in the term will avoid your being unable to find available experiments at  the end.  In past terms there have been enough experiments for all students who wanted to  participate in them and who began their participation early enough in the term.  No Tpoints will  be credited after the last day of classes (Monday, November 12th).    To increase further the educational value of your participation, we have required that  experiments offer a full debriefing session at the conclusion of the experiment for all of their 
3   

participants who wish to attend.  These debriefings may be done right after you finish in the  experiment or near the end of the term.  In the latter case, notices will be sent by email.   
4   

Course Schedule 

 

Mon Sept 10

Professor Heatherton will introduce the course 

 

 

Wed Sept 12

Professor Duchaine 

to 

Mon, Sept 24

Readings will be chapters 1, 2, 3, & 4. 

 

Wed, Sept 26th

First Exam (Filene Auditorium) 

 

 

Fri, Sept 28

Professor Hughes 

to 

Wed, Oct 10

Readings will be chapters 5, 6, 7, & 8. 

 

Fri, Oct 12

Second Exam (Filene Auditorium) 

 

 

Mon, Oct 15

Professor Wheatley 

to  

Mon, Oct 29

Readings will be chapters 9, 10, 11 

 

Note Class will not meet Oct 26th (Homecoming)  

 

Wed., Oct 31

Third Exam (Filene Auditorium) 

 

 

Fri, Nov 2

Professor Heatherton 

to 

Mon, Nov 12

Readings will be chapters 12, 13, 14, 15 

 

Note Class will meet during XPeriod on Thursday, Nov 8th 

 

Fri, Nov 16

Fourth Exam & Final Exam 8:00 am in Filene Auditorium 

 

Remember:  The final exam will include the hour exam for Professor Heatherton's section of the 

course (50 questions) plus the cumulative final exam for the entire course (50 additional 

questions). 

5   

