Abbreviated  Syllabus  for  Posting  
  
Psychology  45  Behavioral  Neuroscience  ­  Winter  2014  

Basic  Course  Information   Instructor:    Professor  Ann  S.  Clark  
Course  Schedule:  10  A  (10-11:50,  Tuesday  and  Thursdays),  X-hours  as  needed  

Course  Description     Psych  45  is  a  required  course  for  Neuroscience  majors.  

We  are  complex  organisms  that  perform  complex  behaviors.  In  this  course  we  will  explore  the   neurological  underpinnings  of  behavior.  Some  topics  we  will  cover  include  the  neural  control  of   life-sustaining  behaviors  such  as  eating  and  drinking.  In  addition,  we  will  explore  how  the  brain   contributes  to  the  display  of  other  complex  behaviors  such  as  sexual  behavior  and  responding  to   stress.  We  will  use  a  variety  of  resources  to  examine  the  relationship  between  brain  and  behavior.   Because  of  the  overlap  in  material  covered,  no  student  may  receive  credit  for  both  Psychology  26   and  Psychology  45.  Prerequisite:  Psychology  6  or  Biology  34.  Dist:  SCI.   

Course  Format    
Behavioral  neuroscience  will  be  taught  following  a  team-based  learning  approach,  details  about   this  approach  are  provided  at  the  first  class  meeting.  Each  of  the  five  units  of  study  begins  with  an   individual  and  team  Readiness  Assurance  Test  (abbreviated  RAT,  see  below)  followed  by   application  of  the  concepts  vis  a  vis  problem  sets  solved  in-class  by  students  working  in  teams.  In   addition,  two  exams  are  given.  For  Winter  2014,  the  assigned  readings  will  include  a  Course   Reader  and  Why  Zebras  Don't  Get  Ulcers,  3rd  ed.  (by  Robert  Sapolsky).    Grades  in  the  course  are   based  on:  individual  performance  on  individual  RAT,  exams,  reflections  and  homework;  team   performance  on  the  team  RAT  and  in-class  activities;  and  peer  assessment  of  the  contribution  of   each  team  member  to  the  effectiveness  of  the  team.  Due  to  the  course  format,  students  cannot   add  the  course  after  the  first  class  meeting.    

Course  Calendar   TBD  dates  will  be  posted  on  Canvas  at  the  start  of  the  term.  

Unit  1  Chemical  &                             ANS  Systems            Unit  2  Endocrine  

Thursday  January  9th  Readiness  Assurance  Test    
(RAT,  ~20  multiple-choice  questions)  
TBD  Readiness  Assurance  Test  

Unit  3  Sex     

TBD  Readiness  Assurance  Test    

Exam  1      TBD  (Exams  include  multiple-choice,  short  answer  and  essay  questions,  
         completing  diagrams,  matching  and  problem-solving)  
Unit  4  Homeostasis   TBD  Readiness  Assurance  Test    

  

Unit  5  Stress     

TBD  Readiness  Assurance  Test    

Exam  2      TBD  Exam  2  takes  place  in  class  (not  during  the  final  examination  period)  
Copyright  @2014  Ann  S.  Clark.  All  rights  reserved.  Redistribution  or  commercial  use  without  the  expressed,  written  permission  of  Ann  S.  Clark  is   prohibited.  For  information  on  usage  rights,  contact  ann.s.clark@dartmouth.edu.  

