CLST 11: Sport and Democratization in the Ancient and Modern Worlds Fall, 2014

Class Time: 9hour: Monday, Wednesday, Friday 8:45am-9:50am (X-Hour: Tuesday 9-9:50am)

Professor Christesen

Office: 319 Reed Hall

Office Phone: 646-2073

Office Hours: By appointment, blitz me, and we will set something up almost immediately

I-Course Description In the past century the extension of political and social rights to previously marginalized and disadvantaged groups in the United States has proceeded alongside the growing participation of members of those groups in sports. Baseball was integrated just as the Civil Rights movement gathered force. Title IX, and the resulting radical increase in the number of female athletes in the United States, was enacted just at the time that the women's rights movement was making major gains in all spheres of American society.

The relationship between democratization in society and in sports forms the subject matter of this course. We will begin to explore that relationship by looking at the various ways in which democratization in society and in sports influence each other in the modern world. Then we will turn our attention to the past and examine the relationship between democratization in society and in sports in sixth- and fifth-century BCE Greece, in nineteenth-century CE Britain, and in twentieth-century CE America. The course will end with a consideration of the lessons we have learned about democratization in society and in sports for public policy in the United States and elsewhere.

The course will draw heavily on methodologies, concepts, and information drawn from a range of disciplines, including: · the sociology of sport (focusing on the theoretical frameworks developed by Bourdieu,
Foucault, and others) · history (focusing on the development of sport in ancient Greece, Britain in the nineteenth
century CE, and the United States in the twentieth century) · political science (focusing on theories and studies of democratization, past and present).

II-Required Texts Paul Christesen. Sport and Democratization in the Ancient and Modern Worlds. Cambridge University Press, 2012. ISBN: 978-1107012691.

Michel Foucault. The Foucault Reader. Pantheon, 1994. IBSN: 978-0394713403.
Jean Grugel and Matthew Bishop. Democratization: A Critical Introduction. 2nd edition. Palgrave Macmillan, 2013. ISBN: 978-0230220577.

III-Grading Your grade will be based on the following components: A-Very short quizzes (5%)

1

There will be a handful of very short in-class quizzes, in order to test your knowledge of basic factual information. You will be informed in advance about the date and the general subject matter of these quizzes.

B-In-class essays (20%) On four Mondays over the course of the semester, you will be given a question and 15 minutes to write a response to that question. You will not be given the question in advance, but it will be based directly on the material we have covered in the preceding two weeks (either in class or in the assigned reading).

You must be present in class and arrive in a timely fashion to write your response. There will be no opportunities to make up a missed in-class essay, but your lowest grade on the in-class essays will be dropped.

C-Midterm exam (25%)

D-Final exam (30%) this exam will include a long essay that you will prepare in advance

E-Daily Take-Away and Question Index Card (20%) At the end of each class session, you will be given an index card and a few minutes to write down your major take-away from that day's class and a question that responds to the material we have covered in that class and that you would like to have answered. You must attend the entirety of class in order to submit your card. You cannot submit a card if you show up substantially late for class or miss class entirely. Your grade for the daily take-away and question component of your course grade will be calculated as follows:

28 satisfactory cards: A+ 24-23 satisfactory cards: A20 satisfactory cards: B 18 satisfactory cards: C+ 16 satisfactory cards: C14 or fewer satisfactory cards: E

27-25 satisfactory cards: A 22-21 satisfactory cards: B+ 19 satisfactory cards: B17 satisfactory cards: C 15 satisfactory cards: D

F-Paper You have the option of writing a paper on subject matter related to the issues covered in the course, with the specific topic and scale of the paper to be decided on an individual basis. Such papers can focus on historical issues (e.g., the reasons for the appearance and popularity of Muscular Christianity in nineteenthcentury Britain), on sociological issues (e.g., how the role of females in Dartmouth athletics is evolving), or policy issues (what guidelines should be offered to coaches of high-school varsity athletic teams in order to encourage democratization in society as a whole?).

If you choose to write this paper, your grade for that assignment will count for 20% of your final grade for the course (and the weighting of midterm, final, and
2

daily index cards in calculating your grade for the course will be reduced proportionately).
IV-Assignments As I would like to have at my disposal the flexibility to modify details of focus and reading as the class develops, I will not provide a full schedule of assignments in advance. Assignments will be listed about two weeks in advance on the course website.
In general terms, I expect this to be a fairly large class, and, with that in mind, my tentative plan is to keep the assigned reading relatively light and to focus on presenting information, concepts, and ideas primarily through lecture.
V-Accommodations Students with disabilities enrolled in this course and who may need disability-related classroom accommodations are encouraged to make an appointment to see one or the other of the instructors before the end of the second week of the term. All discussions will remain confidential, although the Student Accessibility Services office may be consulted to discuss appropriate implementation of any accommodation requested.
Students who wish to take part in religious observances that conflict with their participation in the course are encouraged to make an appointment outside of class time with one or the other of the instructors as soon as possible to discuss appropriate accommodations.
VI-The Honor Principle Students are reminded of the existence of an Academic Honor Principle at Dartmouth, the provisions of which are spelled out at: http://www.dartmouth.edu/~uja/honor/. Students are responsible for the information concerning plagiarism found in Sources: Their Use and Acknowledgment available in the Deans' Offices or online at http://www.dartmouth.edu/~sources/. For the purposes of this course, it is essential that students: (a) give credit where credit is due in all papers by citing sources for all quotations, paraphrased arguments, or summaries of basic evidence. (b) refrain from copying a fellow student's responses to quizzes and exams administered in class.
Students with questions should see the instructor prior to the submission of any work which might violate the Honor Principle.
3

