Department of Sociology Dartmouth College Winter 2014

Course:

The Sociology of Globalization (Sociology 69)

Time:

MWF 11:15-12:20 X-Hour: Tuesday 12:00-12:50

Instructor:

John Campbell 123 Silsby Hall Office phone: 646-2542

Office Hours: Monday 1:00-3:00 (and by appointment)

E-Mail: I will try to answer e-mail queries as soon as I can. However, given the rather large amount of email that I receive, I can make no guarantees how fast that will be. For the same reason, my responses may be rather short. Please do not take offense.

Course Description: The international scope of political, economic, and cultural activity has increased dramatically during the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. But how extensive has the trend toward "globalization" been? And what is globalization? Is it really a new phenomenon or have we seen this before? Has globalization changed societies? If so, how? If not, why not? Are societies becoming more alike because they experience globalization pressures or do they retain their unique national characteristics? Is the United States' hegemonic position in the world in jeopardy due to globalization? Does the rise of the BRICs (Brazil, Russia, India, China) and other newly industrializing countries of the "South" threaten to upset the dominance of the more advanced industrial democracies of the "North"? This course examines these questions and more. Specifically, it looks at how globalization has developed recently and how it has affected corporations, nation-states, workers, social inequality, citizenship, culture, and other aspects of society.

Required Texts: The following required books for the course are available at the Dartmouth Bookstore and Wheelock Books. They are also on reserve in Baker-Berry Library.

Daniel Alpert. 2013. The Age of Oversupply. NY: Penguin. Tyler Cowen. 2002. Creative Destruction: How Globalization is Changing the World's Cultures.
Princeton: Princeton University Press. Jean-Marie Guehenno. 2000. The End of the Nation-State. University of Minnesota Press. Mauro Guillén and Estaban García-Canal. 2010. The New Multinationals. NY: Cambridge University
Press. Jody Heymann and Alison Earle. 2010. Raising the Global Floor. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

General Course Requirements: All students are expected to attend lectures, do the reading, participate in class discussions, take the exams, write a research paper, and contribute to a group presentation.

Examinations: There will be two take-home exams including the final exam. Both will involve essay and short answer questions. Both will be open book, but you will not be permitted to discuss them with anyone else. The final exam will not be cumulative­it will only cover material after the first exam. The exam dates are listed below in the course outline.

2

Deadlines for Exams and Papers: Due dates for all exams and the research paper are listed in the course outline below. Take home exams and research papers turned in after the due date will be graded down automatically according to how late they arrive. In very unusual circumstances late exams or papers may be accepted without being graded down, but only if (1) you know in advance that you will be unable for extraordinary reasons to turn the exam or paper in on time and you make arrangements with the instructor at least one week before the scheduled due date, or (2) you are suddenly hospitalized or become seriously ill, have documentation to that effect from a doctor or dean, and consult with the instructor as soon as possible.

Class Discussions: At the end of every section of the course we will have a class discussion of the reading and lecture material in that section of the course. These discussions will focus on questions posed in the course outline for that day. These questions are designed so that people can take sides on the issue. So be prepared to argue both sides of the question.

Research Paper: Each student will be required to write a research paper (roughly 10 double-spaced pages). This will involve developing an analysis about how globalization has affected a particular country. Every student will focus on a different country. All regions of the world will be represented. Students will have an opportunity to express their preference for which country they will research, but the instructor will make the final decision. (See "Research Project: Globalization and Nation-States" on Blackboard for details.) Papers are due in class February 26.

Group Presentation: Students who have prepared country reports within the same region of the world will collaborate to prepare a 15-20 minute presentation for the class on how globalization has affected their region of the world. These presentations will be based on the student country reports that they have prepared. So, for example, all the students who researched countries in Africa will prepare a class presentation on globalization and Africa summarizing the degree to which their countries exhibited common trends (or not) in the face of increased globalization. (See "Research Project: Globalization and Nation-States" on Blackboard for details.) Groups will not be graded on their performance. There will very likely be a question on the final exam relating to the group presentations. Class presentations are scheduled for March 5 and 7.

Grading: Grades will be based on the total number of points earned on the exams, research paper, and class participation.

Midterm Exam Final Exam Research Paper Class Participation

30% (60 points) 30% (60 points) 30% (60 points) 10% (20 points)

Honor Principle: Examinations and the research paper will be conducted in accord with the principles of academic honor detailed in Dartmouth's Organization, Regulations and Courses and in the Student Handbook.

Students with Disabilities: I encourage students with disabilities, including "invisible" disabilities like chronic diseases, learning disabilities, and psychiatric disabilities to discuss with me after class or during my office hours by the end of the second week of the term appropriate academic adjustments or accommodations that might be helpful to you. All discussions will remain confidential, although the

3
Academic Skills Center may be consulted to verify the documentation of the disability.
Reading Assignments: The reading assignments for the course are listed below in the course outline. It is expected that you will have done the reading by the time class meets on the date for which the assignment is listed in the syllabus.
Course Outline:
Part I: The Rise of Globalization
Jan 6 Introduction: The First Globalization Alpert. The Age of Oversupply. (Begin reading)
Jan 8 The Second Globalization: Creating the Post-War Political-Economic Order Alpert. The Age of Oversupply. (Continue reading)
Jan 9 The Rise of Neoliberalism Alpert. The Age of Oversupply. (Continue reading)
Jan 13 Movie: The Crash Alpert. The Age of Oversupply. (Continue reading)
Jan 15 The Washington Consensus and Its Effects Alpert. The Age of Oversupply. (Continue reading)
Jan 17 Discussion: Has the rise of neoliberalism and the Washington Consensus been good or bad? What sorts of benefits and problems has it brought to us? Have countries in the "north" taken advantage of countries in the "south" or is it the other way around? Are the newly industrializing countries of the "South" threatening the advanced industrial countries of the "North"? Alpert. The Age of Oversupply. (Finish reading)
Part II: Globalization and Corporations
Jan 20 No Class: Martin Luther King Jr. holiday Guillén and García-Canal. The New Multinationals. (Begin reading) NB: Don't get swamped by the details of all the case studies in the book. Keep your eye on the broader points, trends, and arguments.
Jan 21 X-Hour: From Bureaucracy to Networks Guillén and García-Canal. The New Multinationals. (Continue reading)
Jan 22 Corporate Governance and Strategy Guillén and García-Canal. The New Multinationals. (Continue reading)
Jan 24 Multinational Corporations Guillén and García-Canal. The New Multinationals. (Continue reading)

4
Jan 27 Movie: Is Wal-Mart Good for America? Guillén and García-Canal. The New Multinationals. (Continue reading)
Jan 29 Discussion: Are multinational corporations an uncontrollable force whose power is being unleashed by the rise of globalization? Are developing countries at the mercy of multinational corporations? Are all multinationals the same in terms of competitive advantage and strategy? How has globalization changed how multinationals grow and operate? Guillén and García-Canal. The New Multinationals. (Finish reading) MID-TERM EXAM DISTRIBUTED IN CLASS.
Part III: Globalization and Workers
Jan 31 Changes in Work Heymann and Earle. Raising the Global Floor. (Begin reading)
Feb 3 Global Inequality Heymann and Earle. Raising the Global Floor. (Continue reading)
Feb 4 X-Hour: Training for Global Competition Heymann and Earle. Raising the Global Floor. (Continue reading)
Feb 5 Unions and Globalization Heymann and Earle. Raising the Global Floor. (Continue reading) MID-TERM EXAM DUE IN CLASS.
Feb 7 No Class: Winter Carnival
Feb 10 Discussion: Are workers doomed to be victims of globalization? Or do they have the capacity to "push back" in their own interests against the forces of globalization? Can workers benefit from globalization? Are the costs and benefits of globalization spread equally between the developed and developing countries? Heymann and Earle. Raising the Global Floor. (Finish reading)
Part IV: Globalization and the State
Feb 12 Welfare Reform Guehenno. The End of the Nation-State. (Begin reading)
Feb 14 Tax Reform Guehenno. The End of the Nation-State. (Continue reading)
Feb 17 Institutional Competitiveness Guehenno. The End of the Nation-State. (Continue reading)
Feb 19 U.S. Hegemony in Question Guehenno. The End of the Nation-State. (Continue reading)

5
Feb 21 Discussion: Are nation-states becoming obsolete in the face of globalization? Are they being "hollowed out" by globalization? Or do they still have important roles to play? Is the hegemonic position of the United States in jeopardy thanks to globalization? Should the hegemonic position of the United States be preserved, if possible? What advantages or disadvantages are there to U.S. hegemony? Guehenno. The End of the Nation-State. (Finish reading)
Part V: Globalization and Culture
Feb 24 The Diffusion of Culture Tyler Cowen. Creative Destruction.(Begin reading).
Feb 26 Globalization and World Values: Citizenship and Human Rights Tyler Cowen. Creative Destruction. (Continue reading). COUNTRY REPORTS ARE DUE IN CLASS.
Feb 28 The End of Ideology or Cultural Backlash? Tyler Cowen. Creative Destruction. (Continue reading).
Mar 3 Discussion: Is globalization a threat to national cultures? Is global cultural homogenization occurring? If it is, is it a good thing? If it is not a good thing, how can it be stopped? Tyler Cowen. Creative Destruction. (Finish reading).
Part VI: How Has Globalization Affected Regional Development?
Mar 5 Regional Reports Presented in Class North America/Western Europe East and Central Europe/Russia South and Central America FINAL EXAM DISTRIBUTED IN CLASS
Mar 7 Regional Reports Presented in Class Asia Middle East Africa
Mar 12 FINAL EXAMS DUE IN MY OFFICE (123 Silsby Hall) NO LATER THAN 1:00PM

