SEX AND THE STATE IN LATIN AMERICA 

GOVT 49 / LACS 52 / WGST 32 

 

Professor Lisa Baldez 

Dartmouth College 

Spring 2014 

 

Information 

 

Office:

114 Silsby 

Email:

lisa.baldez@dartmouth.edu 

Office Hours:  Thursday 24 and by appointment 

Classroom: Kemeny 006

 

 

Course Description 

 

This course examines the ways in which gender and sexuality are relevant to politics in Latin 

America. Traditional norms governing relations between men and women persist in the region, 

yet men's and women's efforts to challenge fiercely repressive regimes, deeply entrenched 

norms of machismo, and extreme poverty defy conventional gender stereotypes. Latin 

American women's movements are among the most creative and highly mobilized in the world. 

Gay rights have made tremendous and rapid progress. Under what conditions do genderbased 

movements like these emerge and what impact do they have on politics? How do norms of 

masculinity and femininity shape politics and how are those norms shaped by interaction with 

the state? The cases we study and the countries on which we focus will vary each time the 

course is offered.   

 

FOR NEXT TIME 

++need to teach students how to construct an argument and explain the logic of that argument 

++how has feminism changed over time (shift from welfare capitalism/socialism to 

neoliberalism) 

++what factors shape "domestication" of international norms? 

++to what extent are international norms truly international, vs. domestic standards of some 

countries imposed on others? 

++better way to incorporate skype calls with authors to generate more productive work as 

opposed to they report, we listen approach 

++does neoliberalism cause gender inequality or reduce it? 

 

 

Learning Objectives 

 

By the end of the course, students will: 

 

 Define key terms: sex, gender, state, politics 

 Describe different perspectives about the way in which gender differences are relevant to 

politics 

 Describe and assess the status of public policy governing the following issues in Latin 

America: abortion, divorce, family law, domestic violence, samesex marriage 

 Identify the basic questions and hypotheses in the scholarly literature on gender and 

political representation in legislative office, the executive branch, and the judiciary. 

 Synthesize arguments and empirical detail from the assigned readings and lectures to write 

an essay that explains the emergence and evolution of genderbased social movements in 

Argentina and Chile 

 Synthesize arguments and empirical detail from the assigned readings and lectures to write 

an essay that explains the evolution of some aspect of genderbased law or policy in one or 

more countries in Latin America 

 Synthesize arguments and empirical detail from the assigned readings and lectures to write 

an essay that explains some aspect of gender and political representation 

 Synthesize the material from this course to address a genderrelated issue on the Dartmouth 

campus 

 

 

Books for Purchase 

  

The following books are available for purchase at the Dartmouth bookstore and at Wheelock 

Books.  They are also on reserve in Baker/Berry. 

 

Arditti, Rita (1999). Searching for Life: The Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo and the 

Disappeared Children of Argentina. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

0520215702 

Baldez, Lisa (2002).  Why Women Protest: Women's Movements in Chile.  New York: 

Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521010063 

Htun, Mala (2003).  Sex and the State.  New York: Cambridge University Press. 

ISBN0521008794 

Jaquette, Jane, ed. (2009). Feminist Agendas and Democracy in Latin America. Durham, NC: 

Duke University Press. ISBN 9780822344490 

 

Assignments 

 

Late assignments (even an hour late) will be penalized onethird grade per day.  This includes 

weekends. If you think you might have a problem with this, you should contact me before the 

assignment is due. If an emergency prevents you from handing in an assignment in on time, 

please let me know as soon as you can, preferably before the due date.  I will grant extensions 

only under extremely unusual circumstances.  NB: Students must complete all assignments in 

order to pass the course. 

 

1. Homeworks

5% 

 

You will complete 10 homework assignments over the course of the term. The purpose 

of the homeworks is to engage with the assigned readings actively before you come to 

class. They include writing informal responses, posting news articles, writing 

questions, commenting on lecture, doing a video clip, taking a reading comprehension 

quiz before class, etc.  

 

2   

2. First Paper: Genderbased Mobilization

15% 

 

Write a 5 page essay on a topic handed out in class. The paper will be based entirely on 

material covered in first three weeks of class: the articles read in Week One plus the 

Arditti and Baldez books. Do not do any additional outside reading or research for the 

paper. The paper is due Monday, April 14 by 10:00am. Upload your paper to class 

website.  

 

3. Second Paper: Gender, the Law and Public Policy

20% 

 

Write a 5 page essay on a topic handed out in class. The paper will be based on the 

Htun book and the three articles on domestic and sexual violence. Do not do any 

additional outside reading or research for the paper. The paper is due Monday, May 5 

by 6pm. Upload your paper to class website.  

 

4. Third Paper: Gender and Political Representation

25% 

 

Write a 5 page essay synthesizing what we've read on gender and political 

representation. The paper will be based entirely on assigned readings do not do any 

additional outside reading or research for the paper. The paper is due Monday, May 19 

by 10am. Upload your paper to class website.  

 

5. Final Paper

35% 

 

Write a 79 page essay in which you synthesize what you've learned in class and apply 

it to a different context. The paper will be based entirely on assigned readings do not 

do any additional outside reading or research for the paper. The paper is due by 

Tuesday, June 3 at 10:00am. Upload your paper to class website.  

 

Class Policies 

 

1. The Honor Principle. All Dartmouth students have agreed to conduct themselves in 

accordance with the Standards of Conduct in general and with the Academic Honor 

Principle in particular. Plagiarism will not be tolerated.  If you plagiarize, you risk 

failing the class and having your case brought before the Committee on Standards. 

Read the code again, here: http://www.dartmouth.edu/~uja/honor/ We will discuss the 

ways in which the Honor Principle is relevant to the work you will do in this class. I am 

more than happy to answer any questions you have about it.  

 

2. XHours. I will use xhours in two ways. Occasionally I will hold class during the 

xhour. The xhours I have already scheduled are indicated on the syllabus, and I 

reserve the right to schedule additional xhour classes as needed. Most weeks--but not 

all--I will hold informal, optional xhours I will be in Kemeny 006 and available to 

talk to you about whatever you like.  

 

3   

3. Using laptops and other electronic devices in class. You may use your laptop to take  notes during lectures, but not during discussions. Out of courtesy to me and your fellow  students, do not access email or the Internet or your phone during class.  
  4. Learning Disabilities. Students with disabilities enrolled in this course and who may  need disabilityrelated classroom accommodations are encouraged to make an  appointment to see me before the end of the second week of the term.  All discussions  will remain confidential, although the Student Accessibility Services office may be  consulted to discuss appropriate implementation of any accommodation requested.    5. Religious Observance. Some students may wish to take part in religious observances  that occur during this academic term.  If you have a religious observance that conflicts  with your participation in the course, please meet with me before the end of the second  week of the term to discuss appropriate accommodations. 
  Class Outline    Monday, March 24 Key Terms 
Defining key terms: sex, state, gender, politics, Latin America    Wednesday, March 26: Central Questions 
Iris Marion Young, "Gender as Seriality: Thinking about Women as a Social  Collective," Signs 19.3 (Spring 1994) 71338.    Susan Moller Okin, "Gender, the Public and the Private." In: Political Theory Today.  Ed. David Held. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1991, pp. 6790. [This reading is  available electronically on google books]    http://books.google.com/books?id=mZeaAAAAIAAJ&lpg=PA67&dq=Susan%20Molle r%20Okin%2C%20%E2%80%9CGender%2C%20the%20Public%20and%20the%20P rivate.%E2%80%9D&pg=PA91#v=onepage&q=Susan%20Moller%20Okin,%20%E2 %80%9CGender,%20the%20Public%20and%20the%20Private.%E2%80%9D&f=fals e    Silvana Paternostro, "Please Speak Out: A Plea to the Women in Power in Latin  America" in Politics Matters: A Dialogue of Women Political Leaders. Washington  DC: InterAmerican Dialogue, 2000. (article available on Google)    Friday, March 28: Competing Hypotheses    Mala Htun. 2005. "What it Means to Study Gender and the State." Politics & Gender.  1(1):157166.    Joan Wallach Scott, "Gender: A Useful Category of Historical Analysis," American  Historical Review 91, No. 5 (December 1986), pp. 105375.   
4   

J. Jack Halberstam, "Gaga Feminism for Beginners," Chapter 1 of Gaga Feminism:  Sex, Gender and the End of Normal. Boston: Beacon Press, 2012.     Monday, March 31  Arditti, Searching for Life, Intro & Chs. 13     Wednesday, April 2  Arditti, Searching for Life, Chs. 46    Friday, April 4  Arditti, Searching for Life, Chs. 78    Monday, April 7  Baldez, Why Women Protest, Chs. 12    Wednesday, April 9  Baldez, Why Women Protest, Chs. 35    Friday, April 11  Baldez, Why Women Protest, Chs. 68    Monday, April 14  Guest speaker: Gabriela Montero  Chapter 3 by Espina in Feminist Agendas and Democracy in Latin America  **First Paper due by 10:00 am    Wednesday, April 16 TBA     Friday, April 18 No Class Today    Monday, April 21  Htun, Sex and the State, Chs. 13    Wednesday, April 23  Htun, Sex and the State, Ch. 4    Thursday, April 24: CLASS MEETS DURING XHOUR TODAY  Htun, Sex and the State, Ch. 6    Friday, April 25: Abortion   Joan Caivano and Jane MarcusDelgado, "The Public Debate Over Private  Lives:" Americas Quarterly Summer 2012.    Monday, April 28  Chapter 5 by Piovesan in Feminist Agendas and Democracy in Latin America   Read Belem do Para Convention  https://www.oas.org/en/mesecvi/convention.asp 
5   

  Wednesday, April 30 
England, "Protecting a Woman's Honor or Protecting Her Sexual Freedom?"    Friday, May 2 
Read the proposal for a new policy on sexual assault at Dartmouth, "Unified Disciplinary Procedures for Sexual Assault by Students and Student Organizations."
Monday, May 5 No Class today  **Second paper due by 6:00pm 
  Wednesday, May 7: Legislative Office 
SchwindtBayer, "Still Supermadres?"    Thursday, May 8: CLASS MEETS DURING XHOUR TODAY 
Marx, Borner and Caminotti chapter in Feminist Agendas and Democracy in Latin  America  Global Database of Quotas for Women, http://www.quotaproject.org  Read "About Quotas," http://www.quotaproject.org/aboutQuotas.cfm    Friday, May 9: The Culture of Congress?  Franceschet, "The Gendered Dimensions..."  Waylen, "Researching Ritual and the Symbolic in Parliaments"    Monday, May 11: Executive Office  Chapter 1 by Rios Tobar in Feminist Agendas and Democracy in Latin America    Wednesday, May 14: The Judicial System  Chapter 4 by Kohen in Feminist Agendas and Democracy in Latin America  InterAmerican Dialogue, "Women and the Judiciary in the Americas"    Thursday, May 15: CLASS MEETS DURING XHOUR TODAY   Neoliberalism and feminism   Chapter 7 by Vargas in Feminist Agendas and Democracy in Latin America    Friday, May 16  Elisabeth Friedman, "Constructing the `Same Rights with the Same Names': The  Impact of Spanish Norm Diffusion on Marriage Equality in Argentina," Latin  American Politics and Society 2013.    Monday, May 19: How do we/should we measure equality?  Chapter 8 by Valdes and Donoso in Feminist Agendas and Democracy in Latin  America  **Third paper due by 12:00 pm    Wednesday, May 21: Femicide and the USMexico Border 
6   

Chapter 9 by Staudt and Montoya in Feminist Agendas and Democracy in Latin  America  Melissa Wright, "Necropolitics, Narcopolitics, and Femicide: Gendered Violence on  the MexicoU.S. Border," Signs 36(3):  707732    Friday, May 23 NO CLASS    Monday, May 26  Readings TBA    Wednesday, May 28  Readings TBA    Friday, May 30  Final paper due by 3pm This doesn't give you much time to synthesize the material.    Tuesday, June 3  This is the last day of the final exam period, so let's make the final paper due then.  OK?     
7   

