Psychology 83

Winter, 2014

Nonverbal aspects of interpersonal communication Professor Kleck
Overview This seminar will focus on the nonverbal aspects of social interaction and
communication. Particular attention will be given to the face and its role in the communication of affective and trait information. In addition, recent work on physical appearance, gestures, gaze behavior, interpersonal space, and paralinguistic aspects of speech will be reviewed and discussed. The methodological issues confronted by investigators in this domain will be examined in detail. Class Meetings
The early part of the term will be devoted to lectures and discussions of conceptual and methodological issues and to a review of experimental findings on a number of topics. The background materials for these discussions will be found in the assigned papers authored by experts in this area. It is important that you read the assigned material prior to each class meeting so that you can participate fully and constructively in the seminar discussions. Please note that in the class schedule below, the assigned readings will be covered in the session for which they are listed. Additional or alternative readings may be assigned for some sessions. The assigned readings can be accessed from Blackboard as Pdf files identified by author. Extra-class Assignments and Sessions
You will be required to attend some sessions in addition to regular class meetings. One of the first of these extra sessions will involve the collection of video records that will be of use in analyzing and understanding your own nonverbal repertoire and communication skills. These extra-class sessions will be scheduled for a time that is convenient for you. In addition, you will be asked to collect data outside of the normally scheduled class hours that will contribute to our analyses of interpersonal communication processes.

Seminar Papers Over the course of the term you will need to prepare several manuscripts (as
Word files). These should be submitted to me as e-mail attachments. The first of these will involve an analysis of your own nonverbal behavior, based in part upon a brief video record showing you conversing with a peer. I will make arrangements to record these video episodes during the first week of the term and will hand out a detailed description of the assignment at the time the video records are made available to you. The document, double-spaced, is due Tuesday, January 21.

Normally five double-spaced pages are sufficient to complete this assignment.

2

The major writing project for the term will focus on a topic you would like to investigate in detail that is relevant to the general focus of the seminar. This will be done in consultation with me and I will provide a list of the sorts of topics that students have selected in the past. You are not limited to the topics on the list I will provide. My primary requirement is that you select something that is of interest to you. After you have done some background reading on your topic, you will need to prepare a prospectus. This brief two or three page document should (1) state the issues you propose to address, (2) identify the literature you intend to review (with representative references cited), (3) outline the general nature of the analyses you intend to undertake, and (4) identify any problems or difficulties you anticipate in executing the project. It is due no later than Tuesday, February 4.
Based on your research into the relevant literature you will need to prepare a manuscript that reflects what you have learned concerning the issues you have chosen to investigate in depth. This writing effort may take a number of forms but should include a critical review of the existing literature on a well-focused question within the domain of interpersonal behavior and communication. The typical length for such a paper is approximately 12 to 14 double-spaced pages. The final version of this manuscript is due no later than midnight Friday, March 7. Brief reviews/summaries of recent research
Research on all of the issues we will discuss in the seminar is accumulating at a rapid rate. An important skill to learn is how to find and summarize these recent findings and to integrate them with previous theories and empirical results. To help you acquire these skills you will be required to find and briefly review recent (last two years) research articles relevant to the various topics we will discuss in the seminar. Starting in week three of the term you will be asked to find and review one article that is relevant to the general topic we are discussing that week. Your review/summary should be no longer than two double-spaced pages and should attempt to relate the new findings to the topic presented in the assigned readings for that week. I will provide the search terms that will allow you to find relevant new studies in the various literature databases (e.g. PsycInfo, Google Scholar, etc.).
I will reserve some class time for you to report (verbally) on what you have discovered. An important communication skill is to be able to report briefly and succinctly to others what you have learned from your reading. I will provide more information on this aspect of the seminar once we have begun. This writing assignment during the middle of the term (four two-page papers) will take the place of the usual mid-term exam.

Individual Conferences and Seminar Presentations

Each seminar participant will be expected to present to the class, some aspect of the research done in connection with his or her major paper. These presentations, each roughly a half-hour in length, are scheduled for Thursday, February 20 through Tuesday, March 4. The date and time of each individual's presentation will be determined by a random drawing conducted near the middle of the term.
I will schedule a time to meet with each of you individually to discuss both your major paper topic and the nature of your presentation to the class. Since these individual conferences will be scheduled during the usual class time on Tuesday, February 11 and Thursday, February 13, the seminar will not meet as a group on these dates. I strongly encourage you to use this period during the term to focus on your major project. The Web and Other Resources
The Internet is a very helpful tool in locating background material for this seminar. I will provide you with the most helpful links that I am familiar with but you should explore the Web on your own, particularly in regard to the topic you have chosen to focus upon for your major seminar paper. PsycInfo, Medline, 360 and Google Scholar will be particularly useful reference tools for you during the term. Anyone not familiar with these databases and search engines should see me early in the term. The reference librarians in Baker/Berry can also be very helpful in locating relevant references. DartDoc is a valuable resource for locating materials not currently available in the library.
Seminar Schedule Tuesday, January 7: A beginning perspective on interpersonal communication. Thursday, January 9: Categorizing and coding nonverbal behavior.
Reading: Ambady & Weisbuch, "Nonverbal behavior". Ekman & Friesen, "The repertoire of nonverbal behavior".
Tuesday, January 14: Facial appearance and social communication. Reading: Langlois, et al., "Maxims or myths of beauty?" Zebrowitz & Rhodes, "Nature let a hundred flowers bloom".
Thursday, January 16: Ingroup-outgroup interaction and interpersonal communication.
Reading: Dovidio, et al., "Nonverbal communication, race, and intergroup interaction". Hebl & Kleck, "The social consequences of physical disability".
Tuesday, January 21: Facial expression of emotion.

3

Reading: Elfenbein & Ambady: "On the universality and cultural specificity of emotion recognition: A meta-analysis". Barr & Kleck, "Do we know what we show?" Self-analysis paper due.
Thursday, January 23: Gaze behavior and social interaction. Reading: Adams & Kleck, "Effects of direct and averted gaze on the perception of facially communicated emotion". Emery, "The eyes have it".
Tuesday, January 28: The interaction of appearance and expressive cues. Reading: Zebrowitz, "Reading faces". Marsh et al, "Why do fear and anger look the way they do?"
Thursday, January 30: The role of paraverbal and nonverbal behaviors in coordinating social interaction.
Reading: Bernieri & Rosenthal, "Interpersonal coordination: Behavior matching and interactional synchrony". Hess & Fischer, "Emotional mimicry as social regulation".
Tuesday, February 4: Deception and its detection.
Reading: Vrij, "Nonverbal communication and deception". Prospectus due.
Thursday, February 6: Research reports. Tuesday, February 11: Individual Conferences (No class). Thursday, February 13: Individual Conferences (No class). Tuesday, February 18: The elements of a good talk. Thursday, February 20: Seminar Presentations. Tuesday, February 25: Seminar Presentations. Thursday, February 27: Seminar Presentations.

4

Tuesday, March 4: Seminar Presentations. Thursday, March 6: Seminar Presentations concluded.
Seminar Paper Due at Midnight, March 7

5

