B
SYLLABUS for Women and Politics (Gov 20.1 / WGST 31.4)
Winter 2013
Professor Brooks
(Last Updated: 6 Jan 2012)
Course Description:
This is a general course about gender and politics in which we will examine the roles of women and men as voters, activists, and politicians. We will begin by examining a wide range of relevant issues, including: how gender affects political participation and partisan preferences, how boys and girls are socialized differently into politics, how public opinion regarding domestic and foreign policy sometimes differs for women and men, and how a different gender balance among office holders might be expected to affect representation, policy, and governance. The course will then critically examine various barriers that women may face in the pursuit of elected office in the U.S., and we will also expand our view beyond politics, by analyzing women in non-political leadership positions in order to draw useful comparisons. Finally, the course will examine the role of gender in an international context, comparing gender dynamics in the U.S. with those of other countries in order to better understand the future of women in politics in the U.S. and in the world at large.
This course is appropriate for all students, from all majors (there are no prerequisites).
Some particular questions we will explore this quarter are:
How does political participation tend to differ (or not differ) between the sexes? Political knowledge? Political interest? What could be the sources of those differences? How early do they tend to start?
How do voting patterns tend to differ and not differ between men and women? Has that been changing over time? How can that affect the political power of different groups?
What key differences exist between the sexes regarding domestic policy preferences? Are there systematic differences between how men and women view foreign policy issues? In particular, are men "hawks" and women "doves" regarding war?
Does it make a difference if people are represented by people who are descriptively like them? That is, are women better represented by women? Are black women better represented by black women than Caucasian women or black men? What are the different facets of representation we should consider when answering these questions?
Do men and women govern differently? Do women leaders tend to have different leadership styles once in office?
Do women face different challenges than men when running for office? And do those factors make it disproportionately harder for women than men to win? Do and women politicians face gender stereotypes vis-à-vis the public? Does the public have higher standards for female than male political candidates? Do the media treat male and female candidates differently?
Do women face a particularly harder time obtaining executive office, as compared to legislative office? What are the prospects for a woman winning at the presidential level in the U.S. in the reasonably near future?
1

Why don't more women run for office? To what extent does that explain why there are relatively few women elected officials in the U.S.?
Do women face a harder or easier time obtaining leadership positions in politics versus business or law? Are women in politics more or less subject to gender stereotypes and different standards of performance than ordinary women? What can we learn about gender and politics by exploring gender dynamics for non-political women?
Why do many other countries tend to have a more representative gender balance in leadership than the U.S.? How does institutional structure influence the representation of women in office? Are there key cultural factors?
Are there generational differences in terms of how people think about issues of gender and politics? How might that affect the potential for change regarding gender and representation moving forward?
How do gender and power interact among Dartmouth undergraduates? What dynamics are you likely to face in your future careers, in or outside of politics? Is there still a power imbalance that tends to favor men or women? If so, are there solutions? To what extent do solutions rest with women, and to what extent do they rest with all people?
Core Readings:
No books are required for this course. Readings consist primarily of journal articles and selections from books.
"BB": A "BB" on the syllabus means check Blackboard, under the "Readings" section. The article may be posted there, or there may be a link or other directions for how to access the material.
Note: This is a rapidly evolving topic so I reserve the right to alter the readings on the syllabus once the quarter is in progress. If a reading is changed, an announcement will be posted on Blackboard to that effect. You can expect that additional readings (especially timely news articles) will be added once the quarter is in progress.
Other Readings:
General Newspaper Reading: Reading a good daily national newspaper will help you in all of your government classes. You will not be "tested" on newspaper reading in this course, per se, but regular readership of a good national paper will make it easier for you to be an effective contributor to class discussions. Some recommendations for a good daily paper include the New York Times and/or the Wall Street Journal.
Other Assignments/Readings: The political environment changes every day and, as such, small assignments, additional news article readings, and/or attendance at local political events may be required as part of the course, and may not be reflected ahead of time on this syllabus. Such assignments will factor into your participation grade.
X-Hours:
This course typically meets in the 12 time period, which is 12:30-1:35 MWF. The X-hour is 1:00-1:50 on Tuesday. You are expected to keep the X-hour time period available; however, it is generally
2

used to make up for that need to be cancelled. You will find that the X-hour can also be a useful tool for scheduling meetings with small groups for class projects, since everyone should have that time available in their schedule.
Occasionally we might have a guest speaker who can only meet with us outside of normal class times; in such situations, you should try your best to attend, but alternative assignments can be arranged if necessary.
Office Hours:
My office hours are Tuesday 10:30-12:45. I have scheduled my office hours to be sure that that at least part of the office hours do not overlap with other classes, so that everyone will be able to attend. For office hours, just sign up on sheet posted outside of my office door (at 231 Silsby Hall), or it usually also works to just stop by during the office hour time period. Also, after class usually tends to be good time to catch me for relatively quick questions (and sometimes my schedule allows for longer ones, as well).
I like to get to know each student in my classes, so I would like for you to come to office hours at least once fairly early on in the term to touch base, and ideally more than that as questions, concerns, or ideas arise. Your grade will not be affected either way by your attendance at office hours -- it is purely for your own benefit, and will not affect your participation grade at all. An exception, however, is that sometimes office hours are required for group project; if that is the case for this class, it will be announced in class.
Course Pace:
This syllabus shows which readings need to be completed before the date posted for that section on the syllabus. Failure to complete the readings by that time will undermine your ability to contribute to class discussion and so is likely to affect your participation grade. You are expected to participate actively and intelligently during class discussions, and you cannot do so without completing the readings on time.
Course Policies:
Please read the "General Course Policies" handout which will be given out on the first day of class and will also be posted on Blackboard. I feel that clarity on the front end prevents confusion and miscommunication later on in a class; as such, that document describes my general expectations and policies for the course. After reading that document, please let me know if you have any questions.
I would especially like to highlight the need for you to be at class right when it starts and to check Blackboard announcements several times per week. Those are two ways that I regularly communicate to everyone in the class. Students who miss the first few minutes of class and/or who do not check Blackboard announcements often end up missing critical information without realizing it.
3

Course Grade Components:
10% = Class Participation
o Your active, high-quality participation in the classroom discussion and class activities will be reflected in this part of your grade. Note that your active participation needs to be spread evenly throughout the course; dynamic participation part of the time and silence (or absence) for multiple class meetings will affect your participation grade.
o I occasionally use in-class writing exercises with guided prompts to allow students time at the start of a class to get people thinking about the readings. When this occurs, I collect them and may factor them in to the participation grade to some extent (the bulk of the participation grade is based on class discussion, however).
25% = Midterm Exam
o This will be a closed book, closed note, timed, in-class blue book exam to assess your understanding of the material to this point in the course.
20% = Comparative Research Exercise
o You will select a country and compare the success of women in politics there to that of women leaders in the U.S. This is a guided exercise rather than a research paper, per se (you will be writing thoughtful set of responses to a series of specific questions). Your grade will reflect both the written document you produce and the degree to which you work to integrate it into relevant class discussions throughout the quarter.
o Depending on final enrollment in the course and/or on the country selected, there may be a group component to this project.
o Note: Although you will not be turning in your final draft until the end of the quarter, you would be wise to complete the bulk of this project during the first two weeks of the class so you can bring up relevant points of comparison to the U.S. throughout the quarter.
5% = "Finding Solutions" Group Project
o With a group, you will formulate a viable solution to a particular challenge facing women in politics (you will pick from a list of challenges, but you can propose alternatives to me). You will present this solution to the class during the last week.
40% = Final Paper
o 5-7 pages, double spaced, on an assigned topic that will allow you to bring together many different aspects of the class. This is not a research paper; rather, the core purpose of this paper is to give you an opportunity to thoroughly leverage the course readings and lectures in your answer to a major question regarding gender and politics.
4

Overview of Gender in Society and Politics
WEEK #1 - Jan 7 (Mon) & Jan 9 (Wed) & Jan 11 (Fri)
TOPIC OVERVIEW: Before we can start to understand the relationship between gender and politics, it is critical to start by understanding how gender functions in society more generally. In so doing, we provide a foundation with which gender and politics can be compared and contrasted throughout the course. Along the way, key terms will be defined and overarching theories will be introduced. We will also start to consider how different generations might tend to consider matters pertaining to gender and politics in different ways.
Mon, Jan 7: Introduction to Women & Politics
Wed, Jan 9: Gender and Society
 [BB] Richard L. Lippa. 2005. pp. 12-44 of "What's the Difference Anyway" (Ch. 1) in Gender, Nature, and Nurture, Second Edition. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
 [BB ­ OPTIONAL BACKGROUND] Richard L. Lippa. 2005. "Theories of Gender" (Ch. 3) in Gender, Nature, and Nurture, Second Edition. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Fri, Jan 11: Gender, Politics, & Generation
 [BB] Nancy E. McGlen, Karen O'Connor, Laura van Assendelft, and Wendy Gunther-Canada. 2011. "Women's Movements in America," Introduction in Women, Politics, and American Society, Fifth Edition. Longman: New York.
 [BB] Kathleen P. Iannello. 2006. "The Political is Personal: Third-Wave Feminist Perspectives on Power," in Women in Politics: Outsiders or Insiders, Fourth Edition, edited by Lois Duke Whitaker. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Education, Inc.
 [BB] Anne-Marie Slaughter. 2012. "Why Women Still Can't Have It All." The Atlantic., July/­ August 2012.
Before class, have a chat with an older female relative. How did she feel about feminism and feminists when she was your age? Now? Does she feel that women have achieved more or less in the U.S. politically and socially (or her own country, if she isn't American) than she thought they would have by this point? Does she think women today have more or fewer challenges than her generation faced? What does she believe the biggest challenges for women in your generation will be moving forward?
5

Gender, Political Participation, & Political Socialization
WEEK #2 - Jan 14 (Mon) & Jan 16 (Wed) & Jan 18 (Fri)
TOPIC OVERVIEW: This week, we will explore the role of women as citizen participants in politics. How can we measure political participation and political engagement? How does the participation of men versus women differ in the U.S.? To what degree might participation and engagement be affected by differing political knowledge levels? How might early exposure to politics vary for boys and for girls, and potentially be responsible for some of the gender differences in adults that are observed?
Mon, Jan 14: Gender & Political Participation ­ Different forms of being heard
 [BB] Sidney Verba, Kay Lehman Schlozman, and Henry Brady. 1995. "Who participates? Race, Ethnicity, and Gender," in Voice and Equality: Civic Voluntarism in American Politics. Cambridge Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. (NOTE: Focus, in particular, on pp. 251-266)
 [BB] M. Margaret Conway, 2005, "Gender and Political Participation," Chapter 3 in Gender and American Politics: Women, Men, and the Political Process, 2nd edition, Sue Tolleson-Rinehart and Jyl J. Josephson (eds.) New York: M.E. Sharp, Inc.
 [BB ­ OPTIONAL BACKGROUND] Nancy E. McGlen, Karen O'Connor, Laura van Assendelft, and Wendy Gunther-Canada. 2011. "The Struggle for Political Rights," Chapter 1 in Women, Politics, and American Society. Longman: New York.
Wed, Jan 16: Gender & Political Participation ­ Political knowledge
 [BB] Michael Delli Carpini and Scott Keeter. 2005, "Gender and Political Knowledge," Chapter 2 in Gender and American Politics: Women, Men, and the Political Process, 2nd edition, Sue TollesonRinehart and Jyl J. Josephson (eds.) New York: M.E. Sharp, Inc.
 [BB] Jeffrey J. Mondak and Mary R. Anderson. 2004. "The Knowledge Gap: A Reexamination of Gender-Based Differences in Political Knowledge." Journal of Politics 66(2). (NOTE: Focus on pp. 492498 + 509-511)
 [BB] Jeanette Morehouse Mendez and Tracy Osborn. 2010. "Gender and the Perception of Knowledge in Political Discussion." Political Research Quarterly 63(2). (NOTE: Focus on pp. 269-272 & 277-278)
 [BB ­ OPTIONAL] Lonna Rae Atkeson. 2003. "Not all Cues Are Created Equal: The Conditional Impact of Female Candidates on Political Engagement." The Journal of Politics 65(4).
6

Fri, Jan 18: Gender & Political Participation ­ Political socialization
 [BB] Marc Hooghe and Dietlind Stolle. 2004. "Good Girls Go to the Polling Booth, Bad Boys Go Everywhere: Gender Differences in Anticipated Political Participation among American FourteenYear Olds. Women & Politics 26 (3/4).
 [BB} Jennifer Wolak and Michael McDevitt. 2011. "The Roots of the Gender Gap in Political Knowledge in Adolescence." Political Behavior 33(3).
 [BB] David E. Campbell and Christina Wolbrecht. 2006. "See Jane Run: Women Politicians as Role Models for Adolescents." Journal of Politics 68.
7

Gender, Partisanship, & Public Policy
WEEK #3 ­ No Mon (MLK Day) & Jan 23 (Wed) & Jan 25 (Fri)
TOPIC OVERVIEW: In order to understand the relationship between gender and politics, it is important to understand the extent to which women and men differ in their voting patterns and policy preferences. Are female voters from Mars and male voters from Venus, or do they tend to be more similar than they might initially appear? The "Gender Gap" represents a pervasive, partisan difference between male and female voters in the U.S. in recent decades; we will study it and we will also expand the concept beyond partisanship to consider gender gaps that are observed for some kinds of policies but not others.
(NO CLASS on Mon ­ MLK Day )
Wed, Jan 23: Gender & Voting ­ The Partisan Gender Gap & Domestic Policy
 [BB] Susan Carroll. 2010. "Voting Choices: The Politics of the Gender Gap," Chapter 4 in Gender and Elections: Shaping the Future of American Politics, 2nd ed. By Susan J. Carroll and Richard L. Fox (eds.)
 [BB] Ronald Inglehart and Pippa Norris. 2010. "The Developmental Theory of the Gender Gap: Women's and Men's Voting Behavior in Global Perspective." In Women, Gender, and Politics: A Reader, edited by Mona Lena Krook and Sarah Childs. New York: Oxford University Press.
 [BB] Nate Silver. 2012. " `Gender Gap' Near Historic Highs." The New York Times, Five Thirty Eight Blog, October 21, 2012. (http://fivethirtyeight.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/10/21/gender-gapnear-historic-highs/)
Fri, Jan 25: Gender & Voting ­ Foreign Policy
 [BB] Michael T. Koch and Sarah A. Fulton. 2011. "In the Defense of Women: Gender, Office Holding and National Security Policy in Established Democracies." Journal of Politics 73(1): 1-16.
 [BB] Deborah Jordan Brooks and Benjamin Valentino. 2011. "A War of One's Own: Understanding the Gender Gap in Support for War," Public Opinion Quarterly, forthcoming.
8

Gender & Representation
WEEK #4 - Jan 28 (Mon) & Jan 30 (Wed) & Feb 1 (Fri)
TOPIC OVERVIEW: How would having more women in office change politics? Is the value of it primarily symbolic or would policy outcomes likely be different? Do women leaders vote differently once in office than their male counterparts? Do they tend to propose different kinds of legislation? Are they more likely to express views that will be unrepresented otherwise? More generally, to the extent that the values might come into conflict, is it more important that women's policy preferences be represented accurately or that women be represented by women? And is the value of descriptive representation for women the same as the value of descriptive representation for other groups, such as racial or ethnic minorities, and/or gays or lesbians?
Mon, Jan 28: Gender & Representation ­ Descriptive Representation and Policy
 [BB] Michelle Swers. 2001. "Understanding the Policy Impact of Electing Women: Evidence from Research on Congress and State Legislatures ." PS: Political Science and Politics 34(2).
 [BB] Dennis Simon and Barbara Palmer. 2010. "The Roll Call Behavior of Men and Women in the U.S. House of Representatives, 1937-2008. Politics & Gender 6. (NOTE: Focus on pp. 225-230 & pp. 242-243]
 [BB] Kathryn Pearson and Logan Dancey. 2011. "Speaking for the Underrepresented in the House of Representatives: Voicing Women's Interests in a Partisan Era," Politics & Gender 7. (NOTE: Focus on pp. 910-913 & pp. 920-921]
 [BB - OPTIONAL] Beth Reingold. 2008. "Women as Officeholders: Linking Descriptive and Substantive Representation" in Political Women and American Democracy, edited by Christina Wolbrecht, Karen Beckwith, and Lisa Baldez. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Wed, Jan 30: Gender & Representation ­ Descriptive vs. Substantive Representation
 [BB] Anne Phillips. 2010. "Quotas for Women," Chapter 22 of Quotas for Women in Politics: A Reader, by Mona Lena Krook and Sarah Childs (eds.) New York: Oxford University Press.
 [BB] Jane Mansbridge. 2010. "Should Blacks Represent Blacks and Women Represent Women? A Contingent `Yes'." Chapter 24 in Women, Gender, and Politics: A Reader, edited by Mona Lena Krook and Sarah Childs. New York: Oxford University Press.
 [BB] Suzanne Dovi. 2010. "Preferable Descriptive Representatives: Will Just Any Woman, Black, or Latino Do?" In Women, Gender, and Politics: A Reader, edited by Mona Lena Krook and Sarah Childs. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fri, Feb 1: MIDTERM ­ Friday, Feb 1
9

Candidate Gender ­ Winning over the Public
WEEK #5 ­ Feb 4 (Mon) + Feb 6 (Wed) - (no Fri - Carnival)
TOPIC OVERVIEW: Why are there fewer women than men in office in the U.S. and in most countries in the world? One prevalent explanation is the idea that the public applies gender stereotypes to women candidates that hurt them relative to their male counterparts. Moreover, women are often assumed to face higher standards than male candidates while on the campaign trail. To what extent does the U.S. public apply gender stereotypes and/or have higher expectations of ordinary women than ordinary men, and to what extent might we expect those views to carry over to public opinion about candidates? Can it help to explain the parity problem? We will be exploring those questions this week.
Mon, Feb 4: Candidate Gender & the Public ­ Gender Stereotypes
 [BB] Deborah Jordan Brooks, 2013 (forthcoming, Princeton University Press), He Runs, She Runs: Gender Stereotypes, Double Standards, and Political Campaigns. Theory Chapter & Measuring Stereotypes chapter.
[NOTE: Likely X-hour to watch the documentary "Fourteen Women"­ check Blackboard]
Wed, Feb 6: Candidate Gender & the Public ­ Double Standards
 [BB] Linda L. Carli and Alice H. Eagly. 2007. "Overcoming Resistance to Women Leaders: The Importance of Leadership Style," Chapter 3 of Barbara Kellerman and Deborah L. Rhode (eds.) Women and Leadership: The State of Play and Strategies for Change. San Francisco, California: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 [BB] Prentice, Deborah A. and Erica Carranza. 2002. "What Women and Men Should Be, Shouldn't Be, Are Allowed to Be, and Don't Have to Be: The Contents of Prescriptive Gender Stereotypes." Psychology of Women Quarterly 26: 269-281.
 [BB] Deborah Jordan Brooks. 2011. "Testing the Double Standard for Candidate Emotionality: Voter Reactions to the Tears and Anger of Male and Female Politicians," The Journal of Politics, April 2011, Vol. 73(2): 597-615.
NO CLASS on FRI (Winter Carnival)
10

Candidate Gender ­ Coverage by the Media
WEEK #6 - Feb 11 (Mon) & Feb 13 (Wed) & Feb 15 (Fri)
TOPIC OVERVIEW: From Tucker Carlson's comments about Hillary Clinton on MSNBC ("There's just something about her that feels castrating, overbearing, and scary") to Rush Limbaugh's attacks on female candidates on the radio ("Mrs. Clinton's testicle lockbox is big enough for the entire Democrat hierarchy") and many other comments made about female candidates in the media in recent elections, it is clear that female candidates sometimes face extremely demeaning media commentary. But to what extent does media coverage tend to differ systematically for male versus female candidates? How might recent changes in the media be expected to affect media coverage of women candidates? To what extent can we explain the parity problem through differences in media coverage?
Mon, Feb 11: Candidate Gender & the Media ­Case Studies
 [BB] Melissa Miller, Jeffrey Peake, and Brittany Anne Boulton. 2010. "Testing the Saturday Night Live Hypothesis: Fairness and Bias in Newspaper Coverage of Hillary Clinton's Presidential Campaign." Politics & Gender 6.
ASSIGNMENT for discussion in class: Choose any female candidate other than Sarah Palin or Hillary
Clinton about whom you can find at least 15 fairly substantial newspaper articles (i.e., more than just poll results) on Lexis-Nexis in the last six weeks or so of the election. Read at least 15 newspaper articles about that candidate and her opponent in that race; also read at least 10 articles about a comparable male candidate in a different race (i.e., same incumbency status, same type of office, same time period, roughly the same level of likelihood of winning going into the race, etc.) Can you tease out any differences in coverage that you think may be due to candidate gender?
Wed, Feb 13: Candidate Gender & the Media ­ Research Findings
 [BB] Kim Kahn. 1994. "The Distorted Mirror: Press Coverage of Women Candidates for Statewide Office," The Journal of Politics.
 [BB] Dianne Bystrom. 2010. "Advertising, Web Sites, and Media Coverage: Gender and Communication along the Campaign Trail," in Gender and Elections: Shaping the Future of American Politics, 2nd ed. By Susan J. Carroll and Richard L. Fox (eds.) New York: Oxford University Press.
Fri, Feb 15: Candidate Gender & the Media ­ Discuss Miss Representation
ASSIGNMENT: Watch the documentary, Miss Representation, before class on Friday
11

Candidate Gender - Women Running for Office
WEEK #7 - Feb 18 (Mon) & Feb 20 (Wed) & Feb 22 (Fri)
TOPIC OVERVIEW: How much of the parity problem resides with the fact that not enough women run for office? Why do so few women run? How do potential women candidates view their own qualifications for office differently than comparable men? How might they view the process of campaigning differently than men? And are women less likely to be recruited for office than their male counterparts? Do potential women candidates perceive that they face bigger hurdles to winning than their male counterparts, and to what extent might that affect their willingness to throw their hats into the ring?
Mon, Feb 18: Gender & Running for Office ­ Recruitment, Ambition, and Confidence
 [BB] Jennifer Lawless and Richard Fox. 2004. "Why Don't Women Run for Office?" Brown Policy Report, January 2004.
 [BB] Jennifer Lawless and Richard Fox. 2008. "Why Are Women Still Not Running for Office?" Issues in Governance Studies, The Brookings Institution (16): May 2008.
 [BB] Jennifer Lawless and Richard Fox. 2010. It Still Takes a Candidate: Why Women Don't Run for Office, pp. 112-135 on confidence & ambition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 [BB ] Muriel Niderle and Lise Vesterland. 2007. "Do Women She Away from Competition? Do Men Compete Too Much?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2007. (NOTE: Focus on pp. 1067-1073 & pp. 1096-1100)
Wed, Feb 20: Gender & Running for Office ­ The Changing Nature of Campaigns
 [BB] Jennifer Lawless and Richard Fox. 2010. It Still Takes a Candidate: Why Women Don't Run for Office, pp. 138-145. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 [BB - OPTIONAL] Deborah Jordan Brooks. "A Negativity Gap? Voter Gender, Attack Politics, and Participation in American Elections," Politics & Gender, September 2010, Vol. 6(3): 319-341.
12

Fri, Feb 22: Gender & Leadership ­ Politics vs. other professions
 [BB] Alice H. Eagly and Linda L. Carli. 2007. "Is There Still a Glass Ceiling?" Chapter 1 in Through the Labyrinth: The truth about how women become leaders. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation.
 [BB] Alice H. Eagly and Linda L. Carli. 2007. "Where are the Women Leaders?" Chapter 2 in Through the Labyrinth: The truth about how women become leaders. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation.
 [BB] Elizabeth Currid-Halkett. 2012. "Can Women in Academia Have it All?" LA Times, August 21, 2012.
 [BB] Maraget S. Williams. 2008. "Ambition, Gender, and the Judiciary." Political Research Quarterly 61(1).
 [BB - OPTIONAL] Ann M. Beutel and Donna J. Nelson. 2006. "The gender and race-ethnicity of faculty in top social science research departments," The Social Science Journal 43.
 [BB - OPTIONAL] Lori Cox Han. 2010. "Women in the Judiciary," Chapter 7 in Women in U.S. Politics: The Spectrum of Political Leadership, Second Edition. Boulder, Colorado: Lynne Rienner Publishers.
DUE on Fri, Feb 22: Comparative gender research exercise (email to deborah.j.brooks@dartmouth.edu AND
brooks_assignments@yahoo.com by 9:00 am on Friday. Also bring a HARD COPY to class with you on Friday).
13

Gender & Politics in Comparative Perspective
WEEK #8 - Feb 25 (Mon) & Feb 27 (Wed) & Mar 1 (Fri)
TOPIC OVERVIEW: You will have been bringing examples from your comparative case studies into class discussions throughout the term, but the majority of our class readings to this point will have focused primarily on U.S. voters, activists, candidates, and leaders. We will move at this point to an explicit analysis of gender and politics in a comparative context. In addition to exploring structural and societal differences that tend to result in different gender dynamics from the U.S., students will weigh in with their findings from an examination of the political status and future promise of women in another country vs. the U.S. case.
Mon, Feb 25: Gender & Politics in Comparative Perspective ­ Institutions
[BB] Rainbow Murray. 2010. "Conclusion: A New Comparative Framework," in Cracking the Highest Glass Ceiling: A Global Comparison of Women's Campaigns for Executive Office." Santa Barbara, California: Praeger.
 [BB] Sarah Henderson and Alana S. Jeydel. 2010. "Women and Institutional Politics," in Women and Politics in a Global World. New York: Oxford University Press.
 [BB] Farida Jalazai and Mona Lena Krook. 2010. "Beyond Hillary and Benazir: Women's Political Leadership Worldwide," International Political Science Review 31(5).
 [BB - OPTIONAL] Pippa Norris and Ronald Inglehart. 2005. "Women as Political Leaders Worldwide: Cultural Barriers and Opportunities," Chapter 13 in Women and Elective Office: Past, Present, and Future, 2nd ed., edited by Sue Thomas and Clyde Wilcox. Armonk, New York: M.E. Sharpe.
Wed, Feb 27: Gender & Politics in Comparative Perspective ­ Quotas
 [BB] Mona Lena Krook. 2009. "Introduction to Gender Quotas," " Conclusions and Directions for Future Research" + Appendix, in Quotas for Women in Politics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fri, Mar 1: Gender in Comparative Perspective ­ Considering Executive Roles
 [BB] Farida Jalazi. 2010. "Madam President: Gender, Power, and the Comparative Presidency." Journal of Women, Politics & Policy 31(2).
14

Looking Forward
WEEK #9 - Mar 4 (Mon) & Mar 6 (Wed) & Mar 8 (Fri)
TOPIC OVERVIEW: We will have spent the quarter examining the past and current status of women in politics. This week represents a key opportunity to consider the future of women in politics. What are the prospects for increasing the descriptive representation of women in politics in the U.S. in the future? Other countries? How is the balance of power for women in social life and the workplace likely to affect you as you move into your future careers? This is an opportunity for you to brainstorm about what needs to be changed, and to make recommendations about how some of those changes can be made by you, your generation, and men and women overall. Note: The readings this week do not always match up exactly with the particular topic of our discussion for a given day. We will be talking about them at different points throughout the week, and many of them will be most relevant on the final day.
Mon, Mar 4: Challenges for your generation
 [BB] Kathryn Pearson. 2010. "Demographic Change and the Future of Congress." PS ­ Politics and Society, April 2010.
 [BB] Alice H. Eagly and Linda L. Carli. 2007. "How Do Some Women Find Their Way Through the Labyrinth?" Chapter 10 in Through the Labyrinth: The truth about how women become leaders. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation.
 [BB] Alice H. Eagly and Linda L. Carli. 2007. "How Good are Women Leaders and What Does Their Future Hold?" Chapter 11 in Through the Labyrinth: The truth about how women become leaders. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation.
 [BB - OPTIONAL] Jean Reith Schroedel and Marcia L. Godwin. 2005. "Prospects for Cracking the Political Glass Ceiling: The Future of Women Officeholders in the Twenty-first Century," in Women and Elective Office: Past, Present, and Future, 2nd ed., edited by Sue Thomas and Clyde Wilcox. New York: Oxford University Press.
[NOTE: Possible X-hour usage ­ check Blackboard]
15

Wed, Mar 6: Gender, Politics, & Progress ­ Class Solutions
 [BB] Drude Dahlerup. 2007. "Will Gender Balance in Politics Come by Itself?," Chapter 7 of Barbara Kellerman and Deborah L. Rhode (eds.) Chapter 7 of Barbara Kellerman and Deborah L. Rhode (eds.) Women and Leadership: The State of Play and Strategies for Change. San Francisco, California: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 [BB] Pamela Paxton and Meanie M. Hughes. 2007. "Where do we go from here and how do we get there?" Chapter 10 in Women, Politics, and Power: A Global Perspective. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications.
Fri, Mar 8: Gender, Politics, & Progress ­ Looking Forward
 [BB] Eleanor Clift and Tom Brazaitis. 2000. "A How-to for Women" in Madam President: Shattering the Last Glass Ceiling.
 [BB] Lynn E. Ford. 2011. "Setting the Agenda and Taking Action: New Challenges in the Pursuit of Equality," Chapter 9 in Women & Politics: The Pursuit of Equality. Boston, MA: Wadsworth Centage Learning.
 [BB] Marie C. Wilson. 2004. "Parting Words: The Voice of Experience," Chapter 9 in Closing the Leadership Gap: Why Women Can and Must Help Run the World. London: Penguin Books.
WEEK #10 ­ Finals Week - Paper Due
The final paper for this course is due on Tuesday, March 12 at 11:00 am. There is no final exam for this course.
Reminder: Check Blackboard regularly for reading changes. Given the dynamic nature of this topic, not all readings are listed, and more may be added as the course
proceeds.
16

