Government 49.5/LACS 53 Spring 2013 Dartmouth College 2 (1:45 to 3pm) Room TBA

Professor Lisa Baldez Silsby 114; 646-0762 lisa.baldez@dartmouth.edu Ofc Hours: TBA

Protests and Parties in Latin America
Course Description
For many people, Che Guevara remains the key symbol of protest in Latin America. His passionate belief in social justice, his refusal to compromise and the extraordinary personal sacrifices he made on behalf of the poor all contribute to his enduring legacy. While this legacy continues to inspire people to engage in protest and revolutionary movements, it does little to help us understand the conditions under which organized movements will succeed in their goals--or even form in the first place. Under what conditions do people organize on behalf of their collective interests? Under what conditions will efforts to mobilize succeed? What factors determine the impact that social movements will have on public policy? What happens once revolutionary or protest movements gain power? What are the advantages and disadvantages of transforming from a movement to a political party? We address these questions in by studying various cases of mobilization in several Latin American countries.
Course Objectives
When this course is completed, students will be able to:  Discuss the following cases in terms of their emergence, evolution and outcomes  Indigenous mobilization in Guatemala  Shining Path in Peru  Revolutionary movements in Central America  Argentine piqueteros  Identify the main theories of collective action within political science  Rationalist  Resource Mobilization  Structural  Constructivist  Political Opportunities  Explain the main premises and logic behind competing theories, in general and as they apply them to specific cases  Explain the strengths and limitations of various theoretical approaches, in general and as they apply to specific cases  Evaluate qualitative evidence for theories of collective action  Evaluate competing arguments in terms of their validity and persuasiveness  Construct valid and persuasive arguments
Central Questions
Keep the following questions in mind during the quarter. Look for the answers to them as you read, prepare for class and engage in discussion. Keep them in mind as you read about various instances of

collective action in the newspaper (in Latin America and elsewhere, particularly about the insurgency in Iraq). We may add questions to this list as we go along.

 Under what conditions will people organize collectively to achieve their goals?  Under what conditions will groups turn to violence?  How and under what conditions do ostensibly powerless people gain political influence and
get their goals met, especially given conditions of severe inequality?  How do governments respond to collective action? How should they respond?  How does participating in collective action affect the people involved in it?  Does participating in social movements necessarily strengthen democracy?

Books

The books for this class are on sale at Dartmouth and Wheelock Books. They are also on 2-hour reserve in Baker-Berry Library.

Che Guevara, Guerrilla Warfare Javier Auyero, Contentious Lives: Two Argentine Women, Two Protests and the Quest for Recognition Jeff Goodwin, No Other Way Out (A scan of this reading is available on Blackboard) Kay Warren, Indigenous Movements and Their Critics

Articles and Films

The material for the course includes about 10 articles and 2 films. Links to the articles are posted on the
Blackboard Web site. To download them, you'll need to use an on-campus computer or a VPN connection to the Dartmouth server. The films are texts that "count" as much as the books and articles; we will watch
them in class and they will be on reserve in Jones Media Center.

Assignments NB: Students must complete all assignments in order to pass the course.

1. Participation

10%

Class time will include both lecture and discussion. Do all the reading, think about how the readings address the questions posed on the website, generate your own questions and come to class prepared to engage in conversation and debate. Close reading of the assigned material is only the first step of learning. Much of the work of processing information and generating ideas takes place through talking, listening and debating. Your grade will reflect attendance and the value of your contributions to class discussions. I will give out midterm grades on participation to help you assess your performance in class.

2. Quizzes

There will be two quizzes on the assigned readings during the term (15% each).

30%

3. Midterm Paper

25%

2

Write a 6-7 page essay comparing different explanations for the emergence of the Shining Path. The paper is due at the beginning of class on Tuesday, February 3.

4. Final Paper

35%

Write a 7-8 page essay synthesizing what we've read in class in response to a question handed out in class. The paper is due on Friday, March 13 at 6 pm.

Class Outline
This schedule and the articles themselves can be found on the Blackboard site, under the heading "Daily Class Meetings."

WEEK ONE Read: The Communist Manifesto

Monday 3/25 Wednesday 3/27 Friday 3/29

Developing an Inductive Perspective on Social Movement Theory Lecture on Communist Manifesto Discussion

WEEK TWO: Revolutions need resources Read: Che Guevara, Guerrilla Warfare + article on social movement theory

Monday 4/1 Wednesday 4/3 Friday 4/5

Lecture: The Cliff Notes of Revolution? Lecture: The Cuban Revolution NO CLASS TODAY

WEEK THREE: What were the revolutions in Central America all about? Read The Massacre at El Mozote

Monday 4/8 Wednesday 4/10 Thursday 4/11 Friday 4/12

Lecture on Central America Lecture on current legal case X-hour meets today Discussion

WEEK FOUR: Liberation Theology Read: articles, Exodus, watch Romero

Monday 4/15 Wednesday 4/17 Friday 4/19

Lecture: The Catholic Church in Latin America Lecture: Liberation Theology in Latin America Discussion

WEEK FIVE: It's the state, not the people Read: Jeffrey Goodwin, No Other Way Out, pp. 3-66, 137-216

3

Monday 4/22 Wednesday 4/24 Friday 4/26

Lecture: A State-Centered Perspective Lecture: Why Revolution here, but not there? Discussion

WEEK SIX: It's the people, not the state Read: Elisabeth Wood, Insurgent Collective Action, Chs. 1, 4 and 8

Monday 4/29 Wednesday 5/1 Friday 5/3

Lecture Lecture Discussion

WEEK SEVEN: Women's Movements Read: Articles

Monday 5/6 Wednesday 5/8 Friday 5/10

Lecture: Women's Movements in Latin America Lecture: Co-Madres Discussion

WEEK EIGHT: Creating an indigenous collective identity Read: Indigenous Movements and Their Critics

Monday 5/13 Wednesday 5/15 Friday 5/17

Lecture: Indigenous Politics in Latin America Indigenous Identity Formation Discussion

WEEK NINE: Mobilization in the context of globalization Read: Contentious Lives

Monday 5/20 Wednesday 5/22 Friday 5/24

Lecture: From State-led Growth to Neoliberalism Lecture: The Argentine Crisis Discussion

WEEK TEN: Wrapping Up No reading

Monday 5/27 Wednesday 5/29 Friday 5/31

Memorial Day ­ No Class Last Day of Class Final exam period begins

Tuesday 6/4

Final exam period ends

Class Policies

4

1. The Honor Principle. All Dartmouth students have agreed to conduct themselves in accordance with the Standards of Conduct in general and with the Academic Honor Principle in particular. Plagiarism will not be tolerated. If you plagiarize, you risk failing the class and having your case brought before the Committee on Standards. Read the code again, here: http://www.dartmouth.edu/~uja/honor/ We will discuss the ways in which the Honor Principle is relevant to the work you will do in class and I am more than happy to answer any questions you have about it.
2. Class attendance is required and there are no excused absences. Please arrive on time. I will assume you have done any reading assigned for class and I expect you to be able to discuss it. If you miss a class, you miss whatever discussion and learning we do that day. Class is a collective endeavor that cannot be "made up."
3. X-Hours. I will use x-hours on an "as needed" basis, to catch up if we get behind in our coverage of course material, to schedule meetings with visitors on campus, or to make up class if I am out sick. Some x-hours are already scheduled and on the syllabus. If I need to hold additional classes during x-hour, I will try to let you know a week in advance. I am usually available to meet with you during the x hour: just let me know in advance.
4. Late assignments (even an hour late) will be penalized one-third grade per day. This includes weekends. If you think you might have a problem with this, you should contact me before the assignment is due. If an emergency prevents you from handing in an assignment in on time, please let me know as soon as you can, preferably before the due date. I will grant extensions only under extremely unusual circumstances.
5. Blackboard web site. This syllabus provides an overview of our schedule for the term, but the real structure of the course is the Blackboard web site. I use blackboard to post lecture outlines (outlines, i.e., not the full text), links that are relevant to material in class, announcements, copies of all handouts, regular feedback, and any changes to the schedule
6. Using laptops and other electronic devices in class. You may use your laptop to take notes during lectures, but not during discussions. You may not access email or the Internet during class.
7. Learning Disabilities. Students with disabilities enrolled in this course and who may need disability-related classroom accommodations are encouraged to make an appointment to see me before the end of the second week of the term. All discussions will remain confidential, although the Student Accessibility Services office may be consulted to discuss appropriate implementation of any accommodation requested.
8. Religious Observance. Some students may wish to take part in religious observances that occur during this academic term. If you have a religious observance that conflicts with your participation in the course, please meet with me before the end of the second week of the term to discuss appropriate accommodations.
5

Criteria for Grading
A: 1. Excellent mastery of course material 2. Student performance indicates a very high degree of originality, creativity, or both 3. Excellent performance in analysis, synthesis, and critical expression, oral or written 4. Student works independently with unusual effectiveness
B: 1. Good mastery of course material 2. Student performance demonstrates a high degree of originality, creativity, or both 3. Good performance in analysis, synthesis, and critical expression, oral or written 4. Student works well independently
C: 1. Acceptable mastery of course material 2. Student demonstrates some degree of originality, creativity, or both 3. Acceptable performance in analysis, synthesis, and critical expression, oral or written 4. Student works independently at an acceptable level
D: 1. Deficient in mastery of course material 2. Originality, creativity, or both apparently absent from performance 3. Deficient performance in analysis, synthesis, and critical expression, oral or written 4. Ability to work independently deficient
E: 1. Serious deficiency in mastery of course material 2. Originality, creativity, or both clearly lacking 3. Seriously deficient performance in analysis, synthesis, and critical expression, oral or written 4. Cannot work independently
The following grade point values are assigned: A, 4; A-, 3 2/3; B+, 3 1/3; B, 3; B-, 2 2/3; C+, 2 1/3; C, 2; C-, 1 2/3; D, 1; and E, 0.
From Organization, Regulations and Courses http://www.dartmouth.edu/~reg/regulations06/undergrad/degree-req.html
6

