Politics  of  India   Fall  Quarter,  2012         Professor  Simon  Chauchard   simon.chauchard@dartmouth.edu   Office  Hours:  Wednesdays  9.30am-12pm         1.  Description   The  course  is  a  general  mid-level  course  on  contemporary  Indian  politics.  As  such   we  will  review  most  of  the  basic  questions  usually  addressed  by  such  a  course:  how   do  Indian  political  institutions  function?  What  is  the  nature  of  party  competition  in   the  country?  How  do  we  make  sense  of  the  various  social  and  ethnic  conflicts  in  the   country?  What  role  does  the  state  play  in  the  economy  and  to  which  extent  is  this   changing?        While  answering  these  specific  questions  about  India,  our  main  objective  will   however  be  to  think  analytically  about  the  idea  of  democracy.  India  is  often   celebrated  as  the  largest  democracy  in  the  world,  and  roughly  half  of  the  world's   population  living  under  a  democratic  regime  now  lives  in  India.  But  what  does  that   mean  concretely?  How  is  democracy  practiced  in  India  and  what  does  this   concretely  mean  on  the  ground?  How  does  this  compare  to  the  way  democracy  is   practiced  elsewhere?  What  does  the  Indian  experience  tell  us  about  the   transformative  power  of  democracy?  Studying  Indian  politics  provides  us  with  a   prime  opportunity  to  answer  these  more  analytical  and  comparative  questions.   Although  you  will  pick  up  a  vast  number  of  facts  about  the  post-independence   history  and  politics  of  India,  the  primary  purpose  of  the  course  is  thus  to  help  you   use  those  facts  to  think  about  the  state  and  the  performance  of  India's  democracy.        The  course  is  divided  in  two  sections  of  unequal  length.  The  first  ­  and  shorter  - section  is  descriptive  and  somewhat  historical;  during  this  section,  you  will  learn   basic  facts  about  independent  India's  society  and  political  institutions,  as  well  as  get   a  sense  of  political  and  economic  change  in  the  country  since  1947.  This  should   allow  you  to  acquire  the  bases  for  the  more  advanced  discussions  we'll  be  having   during  the  second  part  of  the  course.  That  second  section  is  analytical  and  thematic.   Each  session  will  analyze  an  important  dimension  of  Indian  politics.  These  sessions   will  cumulatively  allow  you  to  learn  about  the  form,  the  state  and  the  performance   of  democracy  in  the  country.        2.    Required  readings      All  readings  will  be  available  on  blackboard  under  "course  documents".        3.    Requirements      Participation:  30%  
1

Quizz  on  first  part  of  the  course:  20  %   Midterm  20%   Final  30%.      Participation:  While  I  will  provide  some  notes,  discussions  of  the  readings  will   occupy  most  of  our  time.  Students  are  expected  to  do  the  assigned  readings  before   class  and  to  actively  participate  in  class  discussions  (Along  with  the  final  exam,   participation  is  the  single  most  important  component  of  your  grade).     How  do  I  assess  who  is  a  good  participant?       
-Good  participation  does  not  necessarily  mean  having  understood  every   aspect  of  the  assigned  material  first  time  through.  The  best  participation   often  comes  in  the  form  of  questions  about  concepts,  arguments,  or  factual   claims  from  the  readings  that  warrant  further  explanation.     -Good  participation  is  constant  and  informed  though.  Participating  a  few   times  in  the  term  will  not  ensure  that  you  get  the  best  possible  participation   grade.  Good  participation  also  requires  that  you  are  well  acquainted  with  the   reading  prior  to  class,  even  if  you  have  not  understood  everything.   Participation  about  the  readings  is  valued,  and  not  merely  your  ability  to   speak  in  front  of  others.     -Although  this  may  be  obvious  to  some,  presence  in  class  plays  a  role  in   determining  what  your  grade  will  be.  I  do  not  monitor  presence,  but  if  I   rarely  see  you  in  class  there  is  a  major  chance  that  you  will  get  a  lower   participation  grade.     -Finally,  your  attitude  in  class  -  even  while  you  do  not  participate  ­  plays  a   role.  I  simply  ask  that  you  be  focused  on  the  discussion  taking  place  in  class   even  when  you  do  not  actively  speak.  Napping  is  excellent,  but  napping  in   class  does  not  count  as  presence,  let  even  participation.  Please  also  see  my   point  about  laptops  below.           Quiz  on  first  part  of  the  course:  before  we  discuss  the  nature  of  Indian  Democracy  in   the  second  part  of  the  course,  we  will  have  an  in-class  quiz  about  what  you  learn   during  the  first  part  of  the  course.    The  test  will  last  an  hour  and  test  your   knowledge  of  basic  facts  about  the  country,  its  population,  its  modern  history  and  its   institutions.  I  will  ask  you  to  answer  a  number  of  short  factual  questions.  Ex:  Who   were  the  three  members  of  the  Gandhi  family  that  served  as  prime  ministers?  What   is  "the  emergency"?  How  are  members  of  parliament  elected?  Etc...      Midterm  and  final:  both  in-class  exams  will  test  the  knowledge  of  the  readings  that   you  will  have  developed  thanks  to  your  notes,  class  discussions,  and  the  notes  that  I   will  provide.  They  will  generally  include  multiple-choice  questions,  short  questions   asking  you  to  define  some  of  the  concepts  explored  in  the  readings  or  to   relate/compare  the  arguments  made  by  different  authors,  as  well  as  a  broader   essay.       
2

Missing  Classes  &  Exams   I  do  not  explicitly  take  attendance  in  this  class.  Hence  I  do  not  require  you  to  email   me  if  you  are  going  to  miss  a  class.  This  being  said,  I  have  a  good  memory  and  a  large   share  of  your  grade  is  participation  (35%).  So  missing  too  many  classes  is  not   encouraged.        Other  than  to  accommodate  specific  needs  for  additional  exam  time,  I  will  be  unable   to  give  you  options  as  to  the  date  on  which  you  will  take  the  midterm  and  the  final.   Put  them  down  in  your  calendars  on  day  one:  these  will  not  change.        If  you  need  additional  exam  time,  please  come  talk  to  me  on  day  one.        Turning  off  devices   I  ask  that  for  three  and  a  half  hours  a  week  we  all  refrain  from  staring  at  our  various   screens  and  that  we  delay  gratification  related  to  exciting  status  updates  or  other   news.  Print  your  discussion  notes  if  need  be.  Unless  you  have  specific  needs,  no   laptops  in  class  please.    
3

4.    Course  Outline      Sept  11:  Introduction  
- Organization  and  focus  of  the  course     - India  in  1947      -Wyatt  and  Adeney:  "Contemporary  India",  Palgrave  (2010).  Chapter  1.        Part  1:  The  Fundamentals:  timeline,  social  structure  and  institutions.  (5)         Sept  13  -  The  People:  Social  and  Ethnic  diversity  in  India        -Wyatt  and  Adeney:  "Contemporary  India",  Palgrave  (2010).  Chapter  2  (43-69)  and   4.        -  Siddharta  Deb,  "The  Factory:  The  Permanent  World  of  Temporary  Workers",  in   The  Beautiful  and  the  Damned,  a  Portrait  of  New  India.  Faber  and  Faber,  2011.        Sept  18  ­  The  Political  Institutions  of  the  Indian  Republic        -Wyatt  and  Adeney:  "Contemporary  India",  Palgrave  (2010).  Chapter  3.        Sept  20  -  Political  Change  in  post-independence  India:  a  timeline        -  Paul  Brass:  "The  Politics  of  India  Since  Independence",  Chapter  2.        -Wyatt  and  Adeney:  "Contemporary  India",  Palgrave  (2010).  Chapter  5  (126-140)      -  John  Hariss:  "Political  Change,  Political  Structure,  and  the  Indian  State  since   Independence",  in  Paul  Brass  (ed.)  Handbook  of  South  Asian  Politics,  Routledge,   2010.      Sept  25  ­  No  Class      Sept  27-  Economic  Change  in  post-independence  India        -Atul  Kolhi,  "Poverty  Amid  Plenty  in  the  New  India",  Chapter  1.    Cambridge,  2012.        -  Luce,  Edward    "In  spite  of  the  Gods"  (2006),  chapter  1.        October  2  ­  Review  Part  1      -  Romila  Thapar,  "Imagined  Religious  Communities?  Ancient  History  and  the   Modern  Search  for  a  Hindu  Identity."  Modern  Asian  Studies,  Vol.  23,  No.  2  (1989),   pp.  209-231.    
4

   October  3  (x-hour)  -  Quiz  part  1      Part  2:  Evaluating  Indian  Democracy  (13)         Oct  4  -  Elections   What  does  the  electoral  process  look  like  in  India?  To  what  extent  are  elections  free,   fair  and  meaningful?        -  Robert  Hardgrave  and  Stanley  Kochanek,  "Elections  and  Electoral  Behavior",  in   India:  Government  and  Politics  in  a  Developing  Nation.  (2008)      -  Christophe  Jaffrelot,  "Voting  in  India:  Electoral  Symbols,  the  Party  System  and  the   Collective  Citizen"  in  Religion,  Caste  and  Politics  in  India,  Columbia  University  Press,   2011.      -Shivam  Vij:  "An  Election  in  Matsura",  The  Caravan,  August  2010.     http://www.caravanmagazine.in/Story/416/An-Election-in-Matsura.html      -  Katherine  Boo:  Excerpts  from  "Behind  the  Beautiful  Forevers",  TBA         Oct  9  ­  Political  Parties  and  Political  Competition   Has  the  political  offer  (parties)  enlarged  and  improved?  Have  these  changes  improved   the  quality  of  democracy  in  India?      -  Re-read  notes  of  parties  from  Sept  20  readings      -  Zoya  Hasan,  "Political  Parties"  in  Oxford  Companion  to  Politics  in  India  (2009)      -  Virginia  Van  Dyke,  "State-level  Politics,  Coalitions,  and  Rapid  System  Change  in   India",  in  Paul  Brass  (ed.)  Handbook  of  South  Asian  Politics,  Routledge,  2010.      -Luce,  Edward  "In  spite  of  the  Gods"  (2006),  chapter  3  &  4.         Oct  11  -  Political  Representation  and  Political  Representatives   Does  the  Indian  system  offer  substantive  and/or  descriptive  representation?       Are  some  people  more  likely  to  win  office  than  others?  Is  representation  open  to  all?     Do  representatives  resemble  their  constituents?        -Christophe  Jaffrelot,  "Indian  Democracy:  the  Rule  of  Law  on  trial",  in  Religion,  Caste   and  Politcs  in  India.(2010)      -  Kanchan  Chandra,  "India's  Democratic  Dynasties",  Seminar,  June  2011  
5

   -  Christophe  Jaffrelot,  `Caste  and  the  Rise  of  Marginalized  Groups'  (pp.  67-88)  in  The   State  of  India's  Democracy,  edited  by    Sumit  Ganguly,  Larry  Diamond  and  Marc  F.   Plattner,  Baltimore:  Johns  Hopkins  University  Press,  2007.        Oct  16  &  18  -  State-citizens  relations     What  role  does  the  State  and  the  administration  play  in  the  democratic  process?  Can   Civil  Society  counterbalance  the  State?      -Luce,  Edward  "In  spite  of  the  Gods"  (2006),  p  64-106  (The  Burra  Sahibs:  The  Long   Tentacles  of  India's  State).      -  Chandra,  Kanchan.  "India  as  a  Patronage  Democracy."    In  Why  Ethnic  Parties   Succeed:  Patronage  and  Ethnic  Headcounts  in  India.  Cambridge  University  Press,   2004.        -  Additional  reading  TBA      -  Niraja  Gopal  Jayal,  `The  Role  of  Civil  Society'  in  The  State  of  India's  Democracy,   edited  by    Sumit  Ganguly,  Larry  Diamond  and  Marc  F.  Plattner,  Baltimore:  Johns   Hopkins  University  Press,  2007.        -  Rob  Jenkins  "NGOs"  in  Oxford  Companion  to  Politics  in  India  (2009)         Oct  23  -  Rule  of  Law  and  Security  Forces   Is  the  rule  of  law  respected?  What  role  do  military  and  security  forces  play  in  the   Indian  Democracy?        -Stephen  P.  Cohen,  "The  Military  and  Indian  Democracy",  from  India's  Democracy,   Ed.  Atul  Kolhi.  (1990)      -  Arvind  Verma,  `Police  Agencies  and  Coercive  Power'  in  The  State  of  India's   Democracy,  edited  by  Sumit  Ganguly,  Larry  Diamond  and  Marc  F.  Plattner,   Baltimore:  Johns  Hopkins  University  Press,  2007.        -Sanjib  Baruah,  "AFSPA:  legacy  of  colonial  constitutionalism",  Seminar  Magazine,   November  2010         Oct  25  ­  In-class  Midterm                 Oct  30  -  Federalism  and  Separatism  
6

How  has  the  country  dealt  with  separatist/secessionist  aspirations?        -Paul  Brass.    The  Politics  of  India  Since  Independence  (1994),  pp  151-228        -"Crises  of  National  Unity  in  India:  Punjab,  Kashmir  and  the  Northeast",  by   Gurharpal  Singh  in  Routledge  handbook  of  South  Asian  Politics  (2010)      -Basharat  Peer  (2010),  "Curfewed  Night",  excerpts  TBA         November  1    -  Democracy  and  violence     Was  democracy  able  to  contain  violence?          -  Steven  Wilkinson  Chapter  1  (pp.1-16):  The  Electoral  Incentives  for  Ethnic  Violence   in  Votes  and  Violence:  Electoral  Competition  and  Communal  Riots  in  India  (2004).          -  Simon  Chauchard,  "Untouchability  in  Rural  India:  Persistence  and  Evolution",   excerpt  from  "Why  Representation  Matters.  Ethnic  Quotas  and  Interpersonal   Relations  in  Rural  India",  manuscript  to  be  circulated.        -Apal  Shah's  BBC  radio  documentary  "India's  red  belt"   http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00s7dvr         November  6    -  Democracy  and  violence        -Gautam  Navlakha  "Days  and  Nights  in  the  Maoist  heartland"  EPW,  04/17/10   http://epw.in/epw/user/loginArticleError.jsp?hid_artid=14662      -  "Why  is  India  so  bad  for  women?",  The  Guardian  August  2012.    
   -  Akash  Kapur,  excerpts  from  "India  Becoming",  TBA.  (2011)         November  8­  Democracy,  poverty  and  development.   Was  democracy  successful  at  improving  basic  standards,  reducing  poverty  and   increasing  social  justice?  What  groups  benefited  from  democracy?  What  groups  did   not?        -P.  Sainath  "Everybody  Loves  a  good  drought",  p21-69,  and  133-19  (1995)      -  Pranab  Bardhan,  Chapter  7  on  "Poverty  and  Inequality"  and  Chapter  8  on  "The   Social  Sector"  in  Awakening  Giants,  Feet  of  Clay:  Assessing  the  Economic  Rise  of   China  and  India.  Oxford  University  Press,  2010,  pp.  90-116      -  Review  the  Mahatma  Gandhi  National  Rural  Employment  Guarantee  Act:  
7

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mahatma_Gandhi_National_Rural_Employment_Guara ntee_Act      -  Akash  Kapur,  excerpts  from  "India  Becoming",  TBA.  (2011)      November  13­  Democracy,  poverty  and  development  (2)      -Atul  Kolhi,  "Poverty  Amid  Plenty  in  the  New  India",  Chapter  2.        -  Kanchan  Chandra,  "Elections  as  Auctions"  Seminar  539  (2004)  http://www.india- seminar.com/2004/539/539%20kanchan%20chandra.htm      -  Pranab  Bardhan,  "Sharing  the  Spoils:  Group  Equity,  development,  and  Democracy"   in  Kohli  (ed.),  The  Success  of  India's  Democracy.  pp.  193-225.  (2001)     
8

