GOV 40.01: Politics of China
M,W,F 10-11:05
Professor Albert Yee Department of Government
Dartmouth College Summer 2013
This course examines the major institutions, processes, and issues in Chinese politics since 1978. The first half of the course begins by delineating the basic structure of China's "partystate," at both the national and local levels, and traces its evolution over the past three decades. The course then analyzes the distinctive characteristics of the Chinese authoritarian political system and assesses its strengths and weaknesses. It examines political dilemmas arising from CCP legitimacy, popular protests, and the rule of law. In particular, the course assesses recent experimentation with democratization, such as village elections, local "consultative democracy," institutionalized political succession, and "intra-Party democracy." The second half of the course focuses more specifically on China's post-Mao reforms and their consequences. It begins with an analysis of the politics and contents of China's economic reforms and development. The course then undertakes a comparative analysis of selected aspects of China's capitalist transformation. The social, economic and ecological consequences of these reforms are then examined. Finally, the course concludes by examining China's current transition to a new model of development and the ongoing melding/contestation of alternative Chinese selfconceptualizations stemming from the Confucian tradition, socialist legacy and neoliberal thought.
Course Procedure and Objectives:
Students are required to critically read the assigned readings for each class and to engage in class discussions of these readings. The purpose of the class discussions is to illuminate the complexities of the materials and to help students refine their understanding of these materials through dialogue and debate. The class seeks to explain empirical facts and to equip students with the concepts they need to construct their own explanations.
Course Requirements:
1) Midterm Exam 2) Empirical Term Paper 3) Final Exam
Books:
Joseph Fewsmith, The Logic and Limits of Political Reform in China (Cambridge 2013). Ann Florina, Hairong Lai and Yeling Tan, China Experiments (Brookings Institution 2012). Scott Kennedy, ed., Beyond the Middle Kingdom (Stanford 2011). Joseph Fewsmith, ed. China Today, China Tomorrow (Rowman and Littlefield 2010).

PART 1: POLITICS IN CHINA

Introduction

Week 1:

China's Political System

 Tony Saich, Governance and Politics of China, 3rd edition, (Palgrave Macmillan 2011), Chapters 5-7.

Week 2:

Popular Protests and Political Repression

 Fewsmith, China Today, China Tomorrow, Chapter 1 (Perry)  Chih-jou Jay Chen, "Growing Social Unrest in China," in Guoguang Wu and Helen
Lansdowne, eds., Socialist China, Capitalist China (Routledge 2009).

Week 3:

Intra-Party Democracy and Rule of Law

 Fewsmith, China Today, China Tomorrow, Chs. 3 (Horsley), 8 (Fewsmith), 9 (Liu), and 11 (Zheng).
 Cheng Li, "Leadership Transition in the CPC," China: An International Journal, v.10:2, August 2012
 Joseph Fewsmith, The Logic and Limits of Political Reform in China (Cambridge 2013).

Week 4:

Local Experimentation with Political Reforms

 Ann Florina, Hairong Lai and Yeling Tan, China Experiments (Brookings Institution 2012).

PART 2: POLITICAL-ECONOMY OF POST-MAO ECONOMIC REFORMS

Week 5:

China's Economic Reforms in Comparative Perspective

 Loren Brandt and Thomas G. Rawski, eds., China's Great Economic Transformation (Cambridge 2008), Chapter 1.
 Ezra F. Vogel, Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China (Harvard 2011), Chapter 13.  Fewsmith, China Today, China Tomorrow, , Chapters 4 (Naughton), 6 (Heilmann) and 7
(Ye)  Scott Kennedy, ed., Beyond the Middle Kingdom (Stanford 2011), Chapters 2-4, 6-8.

Week 6:

Economic Inequality, Urban-Rural Divergences, and Regional Disparities

 Fewsmith, China Today, China Tomorrow, Chapters 5 (Riskin)  Martin King Whyte, "The Paradoxes of Rural-Urban Inequality in Contemporary China," in
Whyte ed., One Country, Two Societies (Harvard 2010).

2

 Stephen L. Morgan and Fang Su, "Regional Inequalities in China," in Shujie Yao, et. al., eds, Sustainable Reform and Development in Post-Olympic China (Routledge 2011).

Week 7:

Social Consequences of China's Economic Development: Education, Health, Social Welfare and Demography

 Ching Kwan Lee, "Labour Reform and Livelihood Insecurity in China," in Shahra Razavi, ed., The Gendered Impacts of Liberalization (Routledge 2009).
 Hu Angang, China in 2020 (Brookings Institution 2011), Chapter 3.  Wang Feng, "Racing towards the Precipice," China Economic Quarterly, June 2012, pp. 17-
21.  Scott Kennedy, ed., Beyond the Middle Kingdom (Stanford 2011), Chapter 5.

Week 8:

Ecological Consequences of China's Economic Development

 Ka Zeng and Joshua Eastin, Greening China (University of Michigan Press 2011), Chapter 3.  Elizabeth C. Economy, The River Runs Black, 2nd Ed. (Cornell University Press 2010),
Chapter 3.
 Fewsmith, China Today, China Tomorrow, Chapters 12 (Cunningham) and 13 (Lewis)

Week 9:

Confucian Tradition, Socialist Legacy and Neoliberalism

 Marjorie Dryburgh, "Foundations of Chinese Identity," in Xiaowei Zang, eds., Understanding Chinese Society (Routledge 2011).
 Robin Porter, From Mao to Market (Columbia University Press 2011), Chapter 6.  Fewsmith, China Today, China Tomorrow, Chapters 10 (Ren) and 2 (Weller and Sun)  Peter Chang, "Confucian China and Jeffersonian America: Beyond Liberal Democracy,"
Asian Studies Review, Vol. 35, March 2011, pp. 43-62.  Willy Lam, "The Maoist Revival and the Conservative Turn in Chinese Politics," China
Perspectives, June 2012.

Conclusion

3

