PSYC 27: Cognitive Neuroscience 
Course Syllabus, Winter Term, 2014  MWF 1:452:50 p.m., B03 Moore Hall  Prof. Ming Meng, Office Hours: Th 2:003:00 p.m. and by appointment  Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences  Office: 446 Moore Hall Phone: 6469129  Email: ming.meng@dartmouth.edu 
 
Cognitive neuroscience is a multidisciplinary academic field that involves psychology, neuroscience, computer science, biomedical engineering, and philosophy. Methods employed in cognitive neuroscience include experimental paradigms from psychophysics, functional neuroimaging, electrophysiology, cognitive genomics and behavioral genetics. Theoretical approaches include computational neuroscience and cognitive modeling. This course will discuss about neural underpinnings of various mental phenomena including perception, object recognition, attention, memory, language, emotion, intelligence, social cognition, and consciousness. It aims to provide necessary background knowledge in cognitive neuroscience to students who are interested in related scientific frontiers.   TEXTBOOK  Gazzaniga, Ivry and Mangun (2013) Cognitive Neuroscience: The  Biology of the Mind, 4th Ed. W. W. Norton & Company.     COURSE REQUIREMENTS    1. Class attendance and attending office hours at least once (10% of  final grade).     2.  In class discussions (20% of final grade).    Throughout the course, you may team up with two or three other students  to lead discussions about a given topic.    3.  Midterm exams (40% of final grade).   There will be two midterm exams, each is worth 20% of the final grade.  No makeup exams will be given except in cases of emergency or with  written medical excuses.    4.  Final exam (30% of final grade).  

The final exam will be cumulative but will focus on materials after the  midterm exams. Again, no makeup exams will be given except in cases of  emergency or with written medical excuses.     5.  Bonus credit opportunities.   There may be bonus credit opportunities announced in classes throughout  the course. You may accumulate bonus credits up to 10% of final grade.     POLICIES  Honor Code: Students in PSYC 27 are expected to strictly adhere to the  Dartmouth Academic Honor Principle.  As described in the Student  Handbook, fundamental to the principle of independent learning is the  requirement of honesty and integrity in the performance of academic  assignments, both in the classroom and outside.  Dartmouth operates on  the principle of academic honor.  Students who submit work that is not  their own or who commit other acts of academic dishonesty will forfeit the  opportunity to continue at Dartmouth.  If you have any questions or  concerns regarding this policy during the course, please contact Professor  Meng.    Students with disabilities: Students with disabilities, including "invisible"  disabilities such as chronic illnesses and learning disabilities, are  encourage to arrange for accommodations that might be helpful to them.  Please meet with Professor Meng as soon as possible (preferably during  the first week of the class) to discuss possible accommodations.  All  discussions will be held in the strictest confidence, although the Academic  Skills Center may be consulted to verify documentation of the disability.     Religious Observance: Some students may wish to take part in religious  observances that occur during this summer.  If you have a religious  observance that conflicts with your participation in the course, please meet  with Professor Meng before the end of the second week of the term to  discuss appropriate accommodations.   

COURSE SCHEDULE (SUBJECT TO ADJUSTMENTS UPON NOTICES IN CLASS)   

WEEK 1 

 

Jan 6 (M) 

Introduction and Course Overview (Ch 1) 

Jan 8 (W) 

A brief review of the brain (Ch 2) 

Jan 10 (F)  WEEK 2  Jan 13 (M)

Methods of cognitive neuroscience I (Ch 3)    Methods of cognitive neuroscience II (Ch 3) 

Jan 15 (W) 

Hemispheric specialization (Ch 4) 

Jan 17 (F)  WEEK 3  Jan 20 (M) 

Perception I (Ch 5)    NO CLASS (MLK Day) 

Jan 22 (W)  Jan 23 (Th)  xhour  Jan 24 (F) 
WEEK 4 
Jan 27 (M) 

Perception II (Ch 5)  Perception III (Ch 5) 
Object recognition I (Ch 6)    Object recognition II (Ch 6) 

Jan 29 (W) 

Attention I (Ch 7) 

Jan 31 (F)  WEEK 5  Feb 3 (M) 

Attention II (Ch 7)    MIDTERM EXAM I 

Feb 5 (W)  Feb 6 (Th)  xhour 
Feb 7 (F) 
 

Mind reading and the brainmachine interface (Ch 8)  Memory I (Ch 9)  NO CLASS (Carnival holiday) 

  WEEK 6  Feb 10 (M) 
Feb 12 (W)  Feb 14 (F)  WEEK 7  Feb 17 (M) Feb 19 (W)  Feb 21 (F)  WEEK 8  Feb 24 (M)  Feb 26 (W)  Feb 28 (F)  WEEK 9  Mar 3 (M)  Mar 5 (W)  Mar 7 (F) 
 
 

  Memory II (Ch 9) 
Emotion I (Ch 10)  Emotion II (Ch 10)    Language (Ch 11)  Social cognition I (Ch 13) 
Social cognition II (Ch 13)    MIDTERM EXAM II  Executive functioning and the frontal lobes I (Ch 12)  Executive functioning and the frontal lobes II (Ch 12)    Consciousness and intelligence (Ch 14)  Free will and the Law (Ch 14)  Review 

