Spiritual Autobiographies: Encounters with Holiness
REL 38 spring 2014
Catharine.Randall@Dartmouth.edu
Thornton 208b Tuesday and Thursday 9:30-10:00
Catalogue description: Course begins with the first spiritual autobiography in the West, Augustine's Confessions, as a standpoint from which to compare and contrast other spiritual journeys. Primary emphasis is on the professor's area of expertise: Christianity.
We read samples of very personal, grace-filled narratives spanning the colonial era to the present-day and witnessing to a variety of encounters with the holy: Puritan, Anglican, Roman Catholic, Native American.
Excerpts of personal accounts about experiential faith from FINDING GOD ; overview of multi-faith conversion narratives, among them African-American, Native American and Muslim through IN SEARCH OF GRACE; contextual information about the historical development of these various religious perspectives.
RULES OF THE CLASS: We are all different and yet same. Therefore, we form a community. As members of this community, we listen; we respect each other; we all learn with and from each other; no raising of hands and no exclusion. We may analyze but we do not judge. Sharing of personal faith experiences is welcomed as is inquiry into non-faith experiences (e.g. humanism, atheism) that are liminal, elevating, therapeutic, otherwise of interest to the class.
STUDENT WORK
1. FINAL PROJECTS paper and ten minute oral summation
Project: OPTION #1 Students are encouraged to investigate a faith tradition with which they are unfamiliar and to expand on the relevant essay in IN SEARCH OF FAITH (e.g. Scientology; the Amish; Christian Science ...) in either a religious historical or cultural perspective (10 -12 pp. essay)
OPTION #2 OR read in full one of the works in the anthology OR OPTION #2a bibliography and summarize and analyze its spiritual perspective for their final project (10-12 pp book report)

OPTION #3 Students write their own spiritual autobiography which MUST be modeled in some demonstrable way on Augustine's Confessions (10-12 pp. autobiographical narrative
2.    Oral  Contextual  presentations:    students  sign  up  to  do  TWO  of  the  texts  in  the  anthology   throughout  the  term  for  which  they  will  construct  a  pictorial,  contextual  Powerpoint  support.     This  is  IMAGES  and  CAPTIONS  ONLY--no  need  to  supply  any  narration(5mn.  Max.)  
One field trip Rauner Rarn Book Library for spiritual diaries and journals--including Eleazar Wheelock's!; three films.
Class structure: 10:00-11:00 context, lectio divina (read aloud, reflect on spiritual themes and language, style and rhetoric)    *Speaker  Series:    "Sharing  My  Story,  My  Spiritual  Journey"45  hr  presentation  and  Q  &  A   the  Reverend  Dr.  Randall  Balmer,  Chair  of  Dartmouth  Dept.  of  Religion   Ms.  Kalindi  Trietley,  DHMC,  on  living  in  an  ashram   Mr.  Andrew  Nalani,  Dartmouth  student  and  former  Pentecostal  Christian      Required  texts:   Ed.  J.  Mulder.    Finding  God:    A  Treasury  of  Conversion  Stories.    Eerdmans,  2012.      ISBN  9780802865755   Saint  Augustine,  Confessions.    Ed.  Henry  Chadwick,  Penguin,  most  recent   Kristin  Hahn,  In  Search  of  Grace:    A  Religious  Outsider's  Journey  across  America's  Landscape  of  Faith.     Harper,  2002.           

Supplemental  bibliography:  

Randall  Balmer,  Growing  Pains:    Learning  to  Love  My  Father's  Faith  

Frederick  Buechner,  Secrets  in  the  Dark  

John  Bunyan,  Grace  Abounding  to  the  Chief  of  Sinners;  Pilgrim's  Progress  

Dorothy  Day,  The  Long  Loneliness  

Trevor  Herriot,  River  in  a  Dry  Land;  Jacob's  Wound  

Anne  LaMott,  Traveling  Mercies:    Some  Thoughts  on  Faith  

Kathleen  Norris,  Amazing  Grace;  Dakota;  Cloister  Walk;  Acedie  and  Me:    A  Marriage,  Monks  and  a   Writer's  Life  

Chaim  Potok,  The  Chosen  

Jana  Reiss  

Thomas  Urquhart,  For  the  Beauty  of  the  Earth  

Terry  Tempest  Williams,    Refuge:    An  Unnatural  History  of  Family  and  Place.    Vintage,  1991.  

Lauren  Winner,  Mudhouse  Sabbath  

---,  God's  Perfect  Child  

  

Recommended  Reference:    Charles  Taylor,  Sources  of  the  Self.    Harvard  University  Press,  1989.  

  

  

SCHEDULE  OF  CLASSES  

Tuesday,  March  25  

Introduction  to  spiritual  autobiography.    Overview  of  syllabus  and  Introduction   of  text,  FINDING  GOD.      The  great  progenitor:    St.  Augustine  

Assignment:    Augustine's  Confessions,  Books  1-7;  also  pp.  14-18  in  FINDING  GOD  

Thursday,  March  27   Preliminary  Discussion  of  the  Confessions  and  elaboration  on  the  genre  of   spiritual  autobiography.    Model  for  so  many  others.      

Assignment:    Confessions,  Books  8-13;  also  Paul  and  Constantine,  pp.  3-13  in  FINDING  GOD;  pp.  51-66  in   IN  SEARCH  OF  GRACE  ("Congregating  with  Monks  and  Nuns")  

  

Tuesday,  April  1    

discussion  of  the  Confessions  and  Paul  and  Constantine.      

Assignment:    choose  your  on-line  journal  format,  or  purchase  a  journal.  Make  your  first  entry.  *   Continue  journaling  regularly  from  this  time.      FINDING  GOD,  pp.  22-45  

  

Thursday,  April  3  

Discussion  of  Las  Casas,  Loyola,  Calvin  and  Teresa  of  Avila.    BORN  AGAIN   typology  LECTIO  DIVINA.  what  is  LECTIO  DIVINA?  

  

Assignment:    Read  pp.  46-81  FINDING  GOD     

  

Tuesday,  April  8  

Dr.  Randall  Balmer,  "the  Born  Again  Experience"    

Discussion  of  Baxter,  Pascal,  Fox,  Bunyan,  Wesley.    

Assignment.      Pp.  82-117  FINDING  GOD  

  

Thursday,  April  10      JOURNALING  WORKSHOP  with  spiritual  autobiography  journalist  expert.    Bring   colored  pencils,  art  supplies  you  like  and  a  journal  or  blank  notebook  to  class  

  

Tuesday,  April  15        FILM:    "The  Apostle"  

Assignment:  write  a  1-2  pp.  response  to  the  film,  using  the  born  again  typology.    This  response  is  for  in- class  discussion;  Read  pp.  118-137  FINDING  GOD.  

  

Thursday,  April  17  

Share  film  response  papers.  Discussion  of  Edwards,  Seton,  Finney,    Sojourner   Truth,  Fanny  Crosby,  Leo  Tolstoy.  

Assignment:      Read  pp.  138-188  FINDING  GOD;  pp.  5-27  IN  SEARCH  OF  GRACE  ("Communing  with  the   Medecine  Man;  Appropriating  with  non-Indians")  

  

Tuesday,  April  22    Discuss  Therese  of  Lisieux,  Black  Elk,  Billy  Sunday,  Evelyn  Underhill.    Clips  from  film   "Therese  of  Lisieux."  

Assignment:      Read  pp.  189-221  FINDING  GOD  

  

Thursday,  April  24   Rare  Book  Spiritual  Diaries  exhibit    

Assignment:    pp.  222-258  FINDING  GOD;  pp.  200-231  IN  SEARCH  OF  GRACE  ("Worshipping  with   Devotees  "  Stretching  with  Yogis")  

  

Tuesday,  April  29    Discuss  Singh,  Dorothy  Day,  C.S.Lewis,  Waters  and  Muggeridge  

Assignment:      Read  pp.  258-306  FINDING  GOD  

  

Thursday,  May  1    FILM:    "The  Way"  with  spiritual  autobiographical  component)  

Assignment:    response  paper  2pp.  (counts  as  class  participation)  on  the  spiritual  autobiographical   statements  in  the  film.    Read  pp.  307-338  FINDING  GOD;  pp.  97-110  IN  SEARCH  OF  GRACE  ("Spreading   the  Word  with  Preachers")    

  

Tuesday,  May  6      

Share  response  papers  to  film  and  discuss.    Discuss  Weil,  Mother  Teresa,  

Merton,  Graham,  Colson,  King  

Assignment:    339-393  FINDING  GOD  

  

Thursday,  May  8    Discussion  of  Fuller,  Day,  Pentecostals,  Bono  

  

Tuesday,  May    13   OF  GRACE  

Donuts  and  full  free-form  discussion  of  all  aspects  of  Hahn's  Book,  IN  SEARCH  

  

Thursday,  May  15      FILM    "One  Track  Heart"  

Assignment:    write  a  1-2  pp.  assessment  of  Ram  Das's  spiritual  journey  for  class  discussion  

  

Tuesday,  May  20       discussion    

Visit  with  former  ashram  member,  Ms.  Kalindi  Trietley  of  DHMC  and  film  

Assignment:    Fine-tune  your  oral  summation  of  your  final  paper.    These  are  TEN  MINUTES  MAX  and   provide  either  an  overview  of  your  paper  or  a  focus  on  one  section--your  choice!  Powerpoint  is  NOT   required.  
Thursday,  May  22   Student  Presentations  
Tuesday,  May  27        Presentations  and  "Soul  Food  
  
  
Grading:  
20%  student  oral  report  
30%  class  participation  
15%    --7%  each:    images  for  FINDING  GOD,  two  selections  
35%  final  paper  
  
Disabilities:    please  provide  me  with  a  students  disabilities  service  letter  and  we  will  work  together  on   your  plan.  
  
Honors  principle:    please  do  your  own  work  and  do  not  collaborate  unless  so  instructed.    Please  consult   the  college  on-line  honor  code  and  adhere.  
  
Religious  observance:    we  will  honor  your  religious  obligations.    Please  let  me  know  a  week  ahead  of   time.  
Grading  is  always  inevitably  subjective.    If  you  are  present  in  class  AND  an  active,  informed,  prepared,   presence,  that  always  helps.    Grading  is  also  comparative-you  will  be  assessed  in  terms  of  your  own   performance  BUT  ALSO  as  compared  to  others'  class  input  and  enthusiasm.      
  
Syllabus  and  grading  policy  may  change  without  notice.      
  
  

  

