Professor Deborah K. King Office: 107 Silsby

Office Hours: Tues. 3:00-4:30 pm, Wed. 3:30 -4:30 & by appointment

PRISONS:

SOCY 51
THE AMERICAN WAY OF PUNISHMENT Spring 2013 ~ 11 Hour 2 Rockefeller

The prison, that darkest region in the apparatus of justice, is the place where the power to punish, which no longer dares to manifest itself openly, silently organizes a field . . . in which punishment will be able to function openly as treatment. Michel Foucault, Discipline & Punishment
From capital punishment to three-strikes-and-you're out to the highest imprisonment rates in the Western world by a factor of five . . . The United States has a punishment system that no one would knowingly have built from the ground up.
Michael Tonry, Thinking about Crime
Prison as a place of confinement, punishment and transformation orients this survey of adult corrections in the U. S. While our focus is on contemporary dynamics, we'll begin with a consideration of the history and ideologies that have shaped the carceral structures and operations. The course critically examines the concept of prison as a total institution or panopticon and its implications as a method of social control. What are the objectives of imprisonment: retribution, incapacitation, deterrence or rehabilitation? How may we understand inmates' as well as correctional officers' subcultures as both adaptations to and resistance against totalizing institutions? What are the collateral "pains of punishment" imposed on their families and communities outside the bars? What have been the implications of mass incarceration for democracy and the economy in the U. S.? Other topics may include popular representations of prison life, women in prisons, the prison-industrial complex, the racialization of prisons, and prison as a culture of death. Dist: SOC WCult: NA

2
Important Note: The nature of our subject, prisons, will necessarily entailed exposure to and examination of extremely graphic language and behavior that may be highly offensive. Students with concerns regarding the suitability of this course for themselves should consult with the instructor before the end of the first week of term.
Books Available for Purchase at the Wheelock Books Britton, Dana. 2003. At Work in the Iron Cage: The Prison As Gendered Organization. New York: New York University Press
Comfort, Megan. 2008. Doing Time Together: Love & Family in the Shadow of the Prison. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Goffman, Erving. 1961. Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of Mental Patients & Other Inmates. New York: Anchor Books
Petersilia, Joan. 2003. When Prisoners Come Home: Parole and Prisoner Reentry. New York: Oxford University Press
Rhodes, Lorna A. 2004. Total Confinement: Madness and Reason in the Maximum Security Prison. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press
Additional Required Readings and Resources
Assigned articles, book chapters, video clips and exhibitions are located in the "ASSIGNED READINGS" folder on Blackboard. The PDFs and links for the assigned readings for each week are filed together in a folder. Also see the list of prison-related films on reserve in Jones Media Center.
Developing the habit of routinely reading a national newspaper (e. g. New York Times, Washington Post, L. A. Times, Chicago Tribune, Atlanta Journal Constitution) is an invaluable for effectively contributing to class discussions and for enhancing your cultural capital.

COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Much of the work of this course will involve our collective examination and discussion of secondary as well as primary sources - print, visual and recorded. Students are expected to attend all class sessions as well as any special sessions, to complete reading assignments in a timely fashion and to participate meaningfully in every class meeting.

25%

2 Short Exercises in the Sociological Imagination The Virtual Prison Tour is mandatory, with second choosen from several
Virtual Prison Tour This course begins with travelers' observations of the prisons and correctional system in U. S. during the 1800s.. This exercise option affords you an opportunity to become more knowledgeable about contemporary corrections in a designated state by taking a virtual tour of its prisons. Details for this assignment will be posted on Blackboard (see Prison Travel Assignment).
Beyond the Prison Walls This option encourages you to consider the importance of non-profit organizations that are concerned with prison and prisoner issues at the state level through an examination of their objectives, structure and impact. Details for this assignment will be posted on Blackboard (see Prison Issues Assignment).

35%

In-Class Midterm Exam The in-class midterm examination will consist of an essay question and may include identifications or short answers. It will cover readings, lectures, discussions, videos, guest presentation, and required special events.

40% Final Project The completion of a research paper or a take-home, final examination.

3
COURSE POLICIES
Honor Principle Academic work is simultaneously a collaborative and an independent enterprise. Consulting others and using their ideas, findings, and interpretations are integral parts of intellectual inquiry. The laborious, critical and creative work of developing one's own understandings is equally important. In this course, you will have opportunities to engage in both endeavors. Therefore it is essential that you maintain the integrity of each. Class members are encouraged to discuss readings, lectures and other course materials with one another. However in-class and take-home examinations, exercise reports, research papers and/or other assignments must be your own independent work, unless otherwise indicated. By putting your name on an assignment that you turn in, you are indicating to me that the work is your own original work.
You should familiarize yourself with Dartmouth College's Academic Honor Principle regarding honesty in completing all course examinations, research papers, and exercises (see online "Academic Honor" under the Registrar Regulations, plus the Standards of Conduct regulations on computing resources and library privileges). This Principle commits each of us to individual responsibility and fairness in all course work; and prohibits cheating on exams, fabricating research, plagiarizing papers, submitting the same paper for credit in two courses without authorization, purchasing papers, submitting fraudulent documents, engaging in computing abuses and forging signatures.
Religious Observances Some class members may wish to take part in religious observances that occur during this academic term, but which may conflict with your participation in this course. Before the end of the second week of the term, please send me an email detailing the occasion, date and the specific course responsibility that may be affected. I will use this information to determine any appropriate accommodations.
Submission & Return of Assignments The submission of assignments, exams and paper is expected on the indicated "due date" during that day's class meeting (unless otherwise stated). Requests for late submissions should be made prior to the due date. Please note that grades on non-approved late submissions will be penalized. All work to be graded should be submitted in a clasp envelope, with your name clearly printed on the front. Graded work will be returned in the same envelope. Course assignments, examinations and papers may not be submitted by blitz, mail or fax (unless otherwise instructed and with prior approval).
Missed Classes As responsible adults, class members should notify the instructor of any anticipated absences. In the event that you miss a class for any reason, you are responsible for getting the lecture notes for that class from another student. As a general policy, I will not make my lecture notes available. I trust that members of the class will be cooperative in sharing their notes, realizing that you may be in a similar position one day. Repeated absences, without documented evidence of illness or family emergency, will adversely affect your participation grade.
Late Submissions & Make-up Exam The submission of assignments, exams and paper is expected on the indicated "due date" during that day's class meeting (unless otherwise stated). Requests for extensions beyond the submission date should be made prior to the due date. Please note that grades on non-approved late submissions may be penalized.
Make-up Exam Students with legitimate reasons may be entitled to make-up the midterm examination. However, such arrangements are only available for students who inform me at least 48 hours prior to the original exam date.
Note for Students who Speak English as a Second Language Students who speak English as a second language are encouraged to meet with the professor during the first week of the term to discuss any academic accommodations that may be of assistance to you.
Note for Students with Disabilities Students with learning or other disabilities as well as chronic health conditions that may disrupt your studies are encouraged to meet with the professor during the first two weeks of the term to discuss any academic accommodations that may be of assistance to you. All discussions will remain confidential, although the Student Disabilities Coordinator, Dick's House staff or other college officials may be consulted.
Electronic Devices Cell and smart phones, iPods, MP3s, iPads, Bluetooths, etc. must be turned-off and put away during class sessions. Laptop computers and notepads should only be used for note taking. Web browsing, handling email or working on non-course related matters are discouraged, and may lead to a reduction in your participation grade.
Email Policy Course assignments, examinations and research papers may not be submitted by email, snail mail or fax. Please note that I typically read and answer my email occasionally each day during the work week (i. e. Mon. ­ Fri.), but not necessarily according to any schedule. As a rule, I am not accessible via email during the weekends.
Classroom Etiquette We will cover some complex and controversial subjects. Understandably, disagreement and debate are welcome and integral parts of the learning process. Please extend respect to all members of the class in terms of your verbal and nonverbal communications, listen attentively to their questions and comments as you would the lectures, and offer your informed observations and criticisms in a constructive manner.

4
SCHEDULE OF COURSE READINGS, ASSIGNMENTS & EVENTS Class topics and reading assignments are subject to change

PART I THE PENITENTIARY AS A MODERN MARVEL March 25 Course Overview

March 27

An Historical Overview: The Penitentiary as a Modern Marvel Fiddler, Michael. 2011. `Superstition will Add to its Horrors': The Early American Penitentiary and its Gothic Shadow.' The Howard Journal of Criminal Justice, v 50 n 5 December: 465­477 (on Blackboard)

Gustave de Beaumont & Alexis de Tocqueville report On the Penitentiary System in the United States and Its Application in France, 1833 (on Blackboard)

Charles Dickens, "Philadelphia, and its Solitary Prison," Chap. 7 in American Notes 1842 (on Blackboard)

Browse: Eastern State Penitentiary - Examine "Explore" and "Learn" menus on the site (on Blackboard)

Gallery of Sing Sing Prison Photos, Ossing, NY by Karl Josker (on Blackboard)

Stratton, Margaret. "Sentencing the Sentenced: America's Abandoned Prisons." Photographs ofprisons including Alcatraz Island, Eastern State Penitentiary, Jamesville Penitentiary, Montana Territorial Prison, and Ellis Island (on Blackboard)

March 29

Controlling Populations of `The Worst Kind': Women Britton, Dana M. 2003. "Penology in America: Men's and Women's Prisons as Gendered Projects," At Work in the Iron Cage: The Prison as Gendered Organization. New York: New York University Press, Chap. 2

Dodge, L. Mara. 1999. "One Female Prisoner is of More Trouble than Twenty Males": Women Convicts in Illinois Prisons, 1835-1896," Journal of Social History, v32 n4 Summer: 907-931 (on Blackboard)

Webb, Alfred. 1896/97. "Symposium on Crime: The Sherborn Massachusetts Reformatory Prison for Women," Journal of the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland,Vol. X Part LXXVII: 316-333 (on Blackboard)

Supplemental Materials: Photographs of Colorado State Prison 1883-1900, view images of female inmates (on Blackboard)

April 1

Denied Penitence: Punishment Worse than Slavery Barrows, Isabel C. "Life in Southern Prisons" Harper's Weekly, v34 n1751 August 2, 1890: 605-607 (on Blackboard)
Lichtenstein, Alex. 1993. "Good Roads and Chain Gangs in the Progressive South: the Negro convict is a slave," The Journal of Southern History v. 59 February: 85-110 (on Blackboard)
Tritten, Larry. 2006. `Early Indian Prisoners of "The Rock",' Native Peoples v19 n4 July/August: 68, 70 (on Blackboard)
Supplemental Materials: The New Slavery in the South--An Autobiography of A Georgia Negro Peon," New York: The Independent, Feb. 25, 1904: 409-414 (on Blackboard)
John and Ruby Lomax. 1939. Southern States Recording Trip. Under "Field notes" see entries for Ramsey State Farm, Huntsville, TX; Cummins State Farm in AK; Parchman in MS; Raiford in FL Under "Photographic Prints" search for "African American convicts" (on Blackboard)

PART II

5
THE AMERICAN WAY: PRISONS, PRISON, PRISON, PRISONS . . .

April 3

Lock `Em Up: The American Way of Social Control Tonry, Michael. 2007. "Determinants of Penal Policies," Crime and Justice, v 36, n 1: 1-48 (on Blackboard)
"Mass Incarceration in America," The American Prospect, January/February 2011 (on Blackboard)
View: "US: A Nation of Inmates?" Inside Story Americas," Al Jazeera Television (on Blackboard)
Supplemental Materials: Rediker, Marcus. 2009. "Teaching the "Slave Ship" to Prisoners Inside Auburn Prison," CounterPunch Blog September 03, 2009. Rediker teaches history at the University of Pittsburgh and is the author of The Slave Ship: A Human History (on Blackboard)

April 5

So, You Think You Know About Prison: Popular (Mis) Representations of Corrections Cecil, Dawn K. and Leitner, Jennifer L. 2009. "Unlocking the Gates: an Examination of MSNBC Investigates ­ Lockup," The Howard Journal of Criminal Justice, v 48, n 2, May: 184­199 (on Blackboard)
Novek, Eleanor. 2009. "Mass Culture and the American Taste for Prisons," Peace Review: A Journal of Social Justice, v21, n3: 376-384 (on Blackboard)
Schrift, Melissa. 2004. "The Angola Prison Rodeo: Inmate Cowboys and Institutional Tourism," Ethnology v43 n4 Fall: 331-44 (on Blackboard)
Supplemental Materials The Angola Prison Rodeo video (on Blackboard)
MSNBC Lock-Up Series. Episodes on Fridays and Sundays 11:00 pm - 2:00 am, Saturdays 9:00 pm - 6:00 am

April 8

Hiding `Em Away: The Surprising Invisibility of Mass Imprisonment Gopnik, Adam. 2012. "The Caging of America: Why do we lock up so many people?" The New Yorker January 30, 2012 (on Blackboard)
Sussman, Peter Y. 2002. "Media on Prisons: Censorship and Stereotypes," in Invisible Punishment: The Collateral Consequences of Mass Imprisonment edited by Mauer, Marc et al. New York: The New Press, Chap. 15: 258-278 (on Blackboard)
Wacquant, Loïc. 2002. "The Curious Eclipse of Prison Ethnography in the Age of Mass Incarceration," Ethnography v3 December: 371-397
Supplemental Materials "Freedom of Information Act Covering Prisons" Society of Professional Journalists (on Blackboard)
U. S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2012. Prisoners in 2011. Washington, D. C.: Government Printing Office (on Blackboard)

PART III INMATE CULTURE, STAFF CULTURE: STATUS AND SURVIVAL

April 10

Life in A Totalizing Society Goffman, Erving. 1961. "On the Characteristics of Total Institutions" in Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of Mental Patients and Other Inmates. New York: Anchor Books, pp: ix ­ 60, 93-112, 125-169
Foucault, Michel. 1995. 'Panopticism' in Discipline & Punish: The Birth of the Prison NY: Vintage Books: 195228, translated from the French by Alan Sheridan (on Blackboard)

April 12

6
Doing Time: Identity, Survival and Prisonization Rokach, A., et. al., 1997. "Loneliness in jail: a study of the loneliness of incarcerated men," International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, v41 June: 168-79 (on Blackboard)
Schmid, Thomas J. and Jones, Richard S. "Suspended Identity: Identity Transformation in a Maximum Security Prison," Symbolic Interaction, v14 n4 Winter 1991: 415-432 (on Blackboard)
Supplemental Materials: Jacobson-Hardy, M. 2002. "Behind the Razor Wire: A Photographic Essay," Ethnography v3 n4: 398-415 Cozzone, Chris. "Welcome to Prison" Prison Photo Gallery. 1997-2000 (on Blackboard)
Jackson, Bruce. "Photo Essay: Texas Death Row and the Cummins Prison Farm in Arkansas," pp. 112-129 (on Blackboard)

April 15

Doing Prison Masculinities: Merchant, Mischief, Macho & Maturity Trammell, Rebecca. 2009. V a"lues, Rules, and Keeping the Peace: How Men Describe Order and the Inmate Code in California Prisons," Deviant Behavior, v 30 n 8 November: 746 - 771 (on Blackboard)
Nandi, M. 2002. "Re/Constructing Black Masculinity in Prison," Journal of Men's Studies v11 n1 Fall: 91-107 (on Blackboard)
Koehler, R. 2000. "The Organizational Structure and Function of La Nuestra Familia within Colorado State Correctional Facilities," Deviant Behavior, v21, n2 March: 155-179 (on Blackboard)
Supplemental Materials: The Angolite, the inmates' newspaper from Angola State Penitentiary in LA (on Blackboard)
The Cell-Door, an Internet magazine by inmates (on Blackboard)
Schad. E. 2005. "Art From the Inside: Pano Drawings by Chicano Prisoners," Raw Vision v 67 (on Blackboard)

April 17

Doing Prison Masculinities: Negotiating Violence Hunt, Geoffrey et. al. 1993. "Changes in prison culture: prison gangs and the case of the `Pepsi Generation.'" Social Problems v 40 August: 398-409 (on Blackboard)
Caputo-Levin, Deirdre D. 2012. The Yard Face: The contributions of inmate interpersonal violence to the carceral habitus," Ethnography, v 7 September: _________ (on Blackboard)
Colwell, Brian. 2007. "Deference or Respect?: Status Management Practices Among Prison Inmates," Social Psychology Quarterly v 70 n 4 December: 442-460 (on Blackboard)
Trammell, Rebecca. 2011. "Symbolic Violence and Prison Wives Gender Roles and Protective Pairing in Men's Prisons," The Prison Journal, v 91 n 3 September: 305-324 (on Blackboard)

April 19

Doing Gender: Prison Femininity in Domesticity and Punishment Kruttschnitt, Candace, Gartner, Rosemary, Miller, Amy. 2000. "Doing Her Own Time: Women's Responses to Prison in the Context of the Old and the New Penology," Criminology v38 n3: 681-717 (on Blackboard)
Supplemental Resources "Cellblock Visions: Prison Art." Web site compiled by Phyllis Kornfeld (on Blackboard) Art Gallery and Interviews on Women and Prison: A Site for Resistance website (on Blackboard)

April 22

Doing Gender: Prison Femininity, Sexuality and Coercion Collins, C. 2008. Transgender inmate faces complaint: Woman who was man in Chowchilla prison for rape. The Fresno Bee, December 6. (on Blackboard)
Jenness, Valerie. 2010. From Policy to Prisoners to People: A "Soft Mixed Methods" Approach to Studying Transgender Prisoners," Journal of Contemporary Ethnography v 39 n 5 October: 517-553 (on Blackboard)
Pardue, Angela; Arrigo, Bruce A. and Murphy, Daniel S. 2011. "Sex and Sexuality in Women's Prisons: A Preliminary Typological Investigation," The Prison Journal v 91 September: 279-304 (on Blackboard)

7

April 24

Doing Time: Becoming a Prison Guard Britton, Dana M. 2003. At Work in the Iron Cage: The Prison as Gendered Organization. New York: New York University Press, Chaps. 1 -3
Supplemental Resources Browse: Maricopa County Sheriff Website [Under General menu, view mugshots, gallery, etc.] (on Blackboard)

April 26

Compromise, Co-optation and Conflict: Keepers and the Kept Britton, At Work in the Iron Cage, Chaps. 4 -7
Supplemental Resources National Public Radio. 2001. All Things Considered Prison Diaries -- "Serving 9 to 5: Correctional Officers' Diary" (on Blackboard)

April 29 No class meeting today

May 1

IN- CLASS MIDTERM EXAMINATION

Part IV May 3

THE HOUSE OF THE LIVING DEAD
A Very Dangerous Place to Be . . . Mental Anguish, Insanity and the Supermax Rhodes, Lorna A. 2004. Total Confinement: Madness and Reason in the Maximum Security Prison. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. Author's Note, Preface, Introduction, Chaps. 1-4

May 6

Abandon All Hope: The Insanity of Total Control Rhodes, Total Confinement, Chaps. 5 & 6
Supplemental Materials Human Rights Organization. 2003. Ill-Equipped: U.S. Prisons and Offenders with Mental Illness, October. HRW Report (on Blackboard)

May 8

A Part of the Penalty: Sexual Abuse in Prisons Struckman-Johnson, C. and Struckman-Johnson, D. 2006. "A Comparison of Sexual Coercion Experiences Reported by Men and Women in Prison," The Journal Of Interpersonal Violence, v21 n12: 1591-1615 (on Blackboard)
View Video Clips and/or Read several Prisoners' Statements, Case Histories and Voices: "No Escape: Male Rape in U.S. Prisons." 2001. Human Rights Watch (on Blackboard)

May 10

The House of the Dead: Old-Age in Prison Liptak, Adam. 2005. "To More Inmates, Life Term Means Dying Behind Bars," Three part series in The New York Times October 2, 3 and 5, 2005 (on Blackboard)
Brown, Michelle. 2012. "Empathy & Punishment," Punishment & Society, October 14: 383-401 (on Blackboard)
Supplemental Materials Human Rights Watch. "Aging Behind Bars: Photos," January 26, 2012
Old Behind Bars: The Aging Prison Population in the United States," Executive Summary (on Blackboard)

Part V May 13
May 15

8
COLLATERAL PROFITS & COSTS: Economic & Political Beneficiaries of Mass Incarceration
Punishing Prisoner's Families Comfort, Megan. 2008. Doing Time Together: Love and Family in the Shadow of the Prison. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, Chaps. 1-3, Appendix A
View: "Knock, Knock: Daniel Beaty on Fathers in Prison" Chris Uggen Weblog. Retrieved March 24, 2008 (on Blackboard)
View: Prison Visiting Room Portraits, An Interview with Alyse Emdur
Prisoners of Love: Intimacy & Trouble Comfort, Doing Time Together, Chaps. 4-6
Dolnick, Sam. 2013. "Up Against the Wall: Prison Snapshots," New York Times, January 26

May 17

Profiting as We Build . . . More Prisons as Economic Recovery? Readings TBA (on Blackboard)
Miller, Bryan Lee and Spillane, Joseph F. 2012. "Civil death: An examination of ex-felon disenfranchisement and reintegration," Punishment & Society October 14: 402-428 (on Blackboard)
Supplemental Materials: Pyle, Kevin and Gilmore, Craig Gilmore. "Prison Town: Paying the Price," a comic book from the Real Cost of Prisons Project (on Blackboard)
Prison Profits, PBS 24 min. (on Blackboard)
CNBC. " Billions Behind Bars - Inside America's Prison Industry Parts 1, 2, and 3" (on Blackboard)

May 20

Going Home: Does Prison Rehabilitate? Petersilia, Joan. 2003. When Prisoners Come Home: Parole and Prisoner Reentry. New York: Oxford University Press, Preface, Chaps. 1 - 3
Supplemental Materials: Stevenson, Bryan. "We need to talk about an injustice," TED Talks. Posted March 2012 (on Blackboard)

May 22

Ready for Life on the Outside? Petersilia, When Prisoners Come Home, Chaps. 4 - 7

May 24

"I've Served My Time:" Making It on the Outside Petersilia, When Prisoners Come Home, Chaps. 8 - 10
Kilgore, James. 2013. "Progress or More of the Same? Electronic Monitoring and Parole in the Age of Mass Incarceration," Critical Criminology, v 21, v1, March:123-139 (on Blackboard)
Supplemental Materials: American RadioWorks. Hard Time: Life After Prison. MN Public Radio (on Blackboard)

May 27 May 29

MEMORIAL DAY - NO CLASS MEETING Course Overview

TAKE-HOME FINAL PROJECT DUE: Sunday, June 2 at 9:00 pm Submit in hard copy to either my departmental mailbox in 111 Silsby or the box outside my office 107 Silsby

