Socy 001 -- Introduction to Sociology
Prof. Goodman -- Summer '14-- Period 11
You have enrolled in an introductory Sociology class, but you may have no idea what you've gotten into. Perhaps you've heard that sociology is the study of society, and since you have lived in society your entire life, you might wonder what you could possibly learn from such a class. I would remind such a skeptical student that you have also lived in your body your entire life, but biology, physiology and medicine are still discovering important things that we did not know before. The way that society works is no less complex than your body and it is unquestionably as deserving of study.
This class will explore some of the basic concepts of Sociology, and hopefully offer insights into the complex and challenging issues that all members of society are facing today, including issues of inequality, globalization and the expanding influence of the mass media and culture industries.
This class has four goals:
1) To understand what is unique about our current society. This generation is faced with new perils, new types of organizations and new ways of communicating. We will look at some of the most important changes, examine some potential disasters and investigate promising trends.
2) To understand the Sociological Perspective. Sociologists have a unique way of looking at things. Instead of focusing on individuals, we look at social systems and at interactions between people. For instance, when a problem emerges, instead of looking for someone to blame and punish, sociologists search for ways to fix the system that is at the root of the problem. This way of looking at things goes against the "common sense" of a society that is fixated on individualism, but it can be a very useful thing to know.
3) To understand basic sociological concepts. Sociology has a history of studying such things as gender, race, sexuality, inequality, organizations, groups and other social things. We will learn some of the basic concepts that sociology has developed to understand them.
4) To understand how social structures can be used to solve our social problems. One individual working alone can do very little to solve our most pressing problems. Solutions will require not only that we understand the systems that produce these problems, but also how to work within these systems to effect change. Sociology can teach us practical ways to address social problems, and even help us with our personal problems.

Grades

Grades will be based on the following:
Reading Points First exam Second exam Final exam

15% 25% 30% 30%

Incompletes will only be given when the student is otherwise passing the course and cannot complete it due to circumstances that are unforeseen and beyond the student's control.
Reading Points: I will provide reading points for your readings. You will be graded on your ability to provide a summary of the author on one of those points when called on in class. If I can tell that you've done the reading and thought about the point, you will get an A. Only students called on in class will be graded on that day. I will use a random number generator before each class to determine who will be called on. If you are absent the day that I call on you without a college defined excuse, you will receive an 'F'. Since most students are likely to be called on only 1 or 2 times, it is important that you be prepared for every class. Some students may never be called on, in which case they will receive an 'A'.

I will give everyone one 'free pass' for the semester on reading points. In other words, you can let me know that you will be unprepared to answer the reading points for that day. However, you must do this before class starts, either in person, phone message or email. You will not be given a free pass after I have called on you.

Exams: Exams will consist of four randomly selected short-answer questions from the reading points, one example of research with two multiple choice questions, and one question that will require a 2-3 paragraph essay usually making connections between readings. I will provide you with a list of possible essay questions to help you prepare for the exam.

Readings
All of the readings will be available as pdf files on Canvas. If you have any problems downloading the readings, please let me know immediately.

Help
Office hours in Silsby 012 are Mon, Wed & Fri from 12:30 to 1:30. If those times don't work, I'm happy to make an appointment. Messages can be left for me in the Sociology office. I can be reached for help by phone (857.399.6137) or email (Douglas.J.Goodman@Dartmouth.edu). I check my email often and it is my preferred mode of communication.
Please let me know if you have any disabilities that will affect your participation in this class. I will make every effort to accommodate you.

Schedule
This schedule is provisional. The most current schedule will be on Canvas
Sociological Perspective Fri. 6/20
Intro
Sat. 6/21 Sociological Perspective. Goodman Sociology, Life and Death
Mon. 6/23 Wolfe, Alan.1989. "Market, State, and Society as Codes of Moral Obligation." Acta Sociologica. Haidt, Jonathan. 2007. "The New Synthesis in Moral Psychology." Science
Wed. 6/25 Marx, Karl. "Use and Exchange Values." Excerpt from Capital. Theory and Commodification. Goodman Research: Overindividuation
Fri. 6/27 O'Brien, Jodi. 1999. "The Paradox of Value." From Social Prisms: Reflections on Everyday Myths and Paradoxes. Research: Homophily
Mon. 6/30 Goffman, Erving. 1997 "Social Life as Drama" From The Goffman Reader. Drama on the Internet. Goodman Research: Stigma & Sexual Orientation
Wed. 7/2 Gans, Herbert. 1994. "Positive Functions of the Undeserving Poor" Politics & Society.
Mon. 7/7 First Exam
Micro & Macro Wed. 7/9
Perrow, Charles. 1991. "A Society of Organizations." Theory and Society. Gladwell, Malcolm. 2000. "Designs for Working." The New Yorker. Fri. 7/11

Ritzer, George. McDonaldization. Besen-Cassino, Yasemin. 2013 "Cool Store, Bad Job." Contexts.
Mon. 7/14 From Consumption to Consumer Culture. Goodman Jhally, Sut. 2000. "Advertising at the Edge of the Apocalypse." From Critical Studies in Media Commercialism.
Wed. 7/16 Holton, Robert. 2000. "Globalization's Cultural Consequences" AAAPS. Barber, Benjamin. 1992. "Jihad vs McWorld." Atlantic Magazine.
Fri. 7/18 Jenkins, Henry. 2006. "Spoiling Survivor: The Anatomy of a Knowledge Community." From Convergence Culture.
Mon. 7/21 Callahan, David. 2004. The Cheating Culture.
Wed. 7/23 Penn, Mark & E.K. Zalexne. 2009. Microtrends: The Small Forces Behind Tomorrow's Big Changes. Research Example 4
Fri. 7/25 Appiah, Kwame. 2006. "The Politics of Identity." Daedalus. Hollinger, David. 2006. "From Identity to Solidarity." Daedalus. "Race, Fraternity, Loyalty" Ethical Case
Mon. 7/28 Second Exam
Inequality Wed. 7/30
Inequality. Goodman. Research Example 5
Fri. 8/1 Various timely articles on Inequality
Mon. 8/4 Race. Goodman.

Wed. 8/6 Massey, Douglas. 2009. "Racial Formation in Theory and Practice: The Case of Mexicans in the United States." Race & Social Problems. Bronson, Po. 2009. "See Baby Discriminate" Newsweek.
Fri. 8/8 Streaming Movie: Crash. Giroux, S & H. Giroux. 2008. "Don't Worry, We Are All Racists." Third Text.
Mon. 8/11 Gender. Goodman.
Wed. 8/13 McLanahan, Sara. 2004. "Diverging Destinies: How Children are Faring Under the Second Demographic Transition." Demography. Research Example 6
Fri. 8/15 Levy, Ariel. 2005. Female Chauvinist Pigs. Streaming Video: Sex & the City.
Mon. 8/18 D'Emilio, John. 1983. "Capitalism and Gay Identity"
Wed. 8/20 Inequality & Education
Final Exam

