Course Information CS58, Operating Systems, Fall 2013
www.cs.dartmouth.edu/~cs58/logistics/index.shtml     Last modified: 09/17/13 09:45:20 AM
Instructor:
Sean Smith Email: sws@cs.dartmouth.edu. (My blitzmail forwards to here.) I will generally read email between 8AM and 6PM. almost always reply within a day, and usually within a few hours. Office: Sudikoff 064 Office hours, Sep 20 - Nov 22: Monday and Friday, 9:30AM-10:30AM, at the Baker-Berry Cafe. (I will be inside, if there's room, or in the Baker lobby, if not). Anomalies will be announced here
Staff:
TA: Rui Wang Labbie: Charles B. Pastuszenski Mail to cs58@cs.dartmouth.edu will forward to the entire staff.
Lectures:
Meeting times: MWF, 11:15-12:20 Tu, 12:00-12:50. (We will make frequent use of X-hours.)
Location: Kemeny 108. (Note: this may change in the first week, depending on enrollment)
Official Textbooks
Silberschatz, Galvin, and Gagne. Operating System Concepts. Ninth Edition. John Wiley, 2012.
Useful References
B. Kernighan and D. Ritchie. The C Programming Language (2nd Edition). Prentice-Hall, 1988. B. Nichols, D. Buttlar and J. Farrell. Pthreads Programming. O'Reilly, 1996. Stevens and Rago. Advanced Programming in the UNIX Environment. Addison-Wesley, 2013 (3rd edition). A. Oram and M. Loukides. Programming with GNU Software. O'Reilly, 1995.
Other Useful Books
F. Brooks. The Mythical Man-Month (Anniversary Edition). Addision-Wesley, 1995. B. Kernighan and R. Pike. The Practice of Programming. Addison-Wesley. 1999. McDougall and Mauro. Solaris Internals: Solaris 10 and OpernSolaris Kernel Architecture (2nd Edition). Prentice Hall, 2006. B. Schneier Applied Cryptography (2nd Edition). Wiley, 1996. A. Tanenbaum. Computer Networks (4th Edition). Prentice-Hall. A. Tanenbaum. Modern Operating Systems (2nd Edition). Prentice-Hall, 2001. (The

substantially different first edition is also useful.)
Graduate Credit:
This course can be taken for "graduate credit" by COSC MS students. If this applies to you, please let me know. You will need to do some extra work---and to avoid an "LP," you should probably plan to do at least as well as a B+ undergrad.
Help:
To get help, send email. Or stop by. Or set up an appointment. Or ask for a help session. If you try stopping by, note that I do have office hours. If you stop by at some other point, I might gently suggest returning during office hours, if I'm swamped with something.
Public Lab Space:
There is public lab space available in Sudikoff Room 001 for students enrolled in computer science courses who need Linux machines (which you will, for this course). Note also that the Yalnix project requires some special configuration, which we will ensure the 001 machines have.
Late Assignments:
Assignments are due when they are due; extensions are not fair to the students sufficiently diligent to complete their assignments on time. If you have a pressing need for a delay, I might listen. Then again, I might not. Plan accordingly. I may otherwise apply a "5% off per hour" late policy both to the written homework and to the programming projects.
Poor Faith Assignments:
Assignments that are extremely careless/sloppy---or missed altogether---will incur an additional grading penalty. Do you work---don't try to game the system.
Exams:
Midterm: We'll have one or two of these. See the lectures page. Final: TBD. (Scheduled by the registrar).
Honor Code:
The Dartmouth Honor Code applies to your conduct in this course. In particular, all work submitted for credit must be your own. You may discuss your homework assignments and programming projects with your classmates, the course staff, and with me. However, you should write up your own written homework solutions and should not read or copy the solutions written by others (in this or previous terms, at Dartmouth or elsewhere).

You should also write your own code and not read code written by classmates. The Dartmouth College policy on sources also applies to this course, which means that all sources must be acknowledged, whether allowed by the instructor or not. For example, software given to you by us must be acknowledged when incorporated into your work. (Whether you go into industry or academia or elsewhere, it would be good to get in the habit of keeping track of and citing all your sources anyway!) If you have any questions about the honor code as it relates to CS 58, please come speak with me. Violations of the honor code will be treated seriously.
Students with Disabilities:
I encourage students with disabilities, including "invisible" disabilities such as chronic diseases and learning disabilities, to discuss with me any appropriate accommodations that I might make on their behalf. (If this may apply to you, I also urge you to discuss things with the Student Accessibility Services office, if you haven't already. They've set up a system where they keep the "appropriate accommodations" on file---so you don't have to discuss details with each new instructor!)
Back to CS58 Home Page     Sean Smith     < sws@cs.dartmouth.edu>

