EARS 37 Marine Geology Fall, 2013

Instructor:

Erich Osterberg, 205 Fairchild Hall, 646-1096, erich.c.osterberg@dartmouth.edu

Graduate TA: Matt Schley, 218 Fairchild Hall, 646-2077 Matthew.L.Schley.GR@dartmouth.edu

Meeting Times: Mon, Wed, Fri 11:15-12:20, X-period Tues 12:00-12:50

Office Hours:

Erich: Mon 12:30-1:30; Fri 4:00-5:00, or by appointment: Fairchild 205 Matt: Tues 11:00-12:00; Thurs 4:00-5:00: Fairchild 217

Class Web Site: http://blackboard.dartmouth.edu

Required Texts: 1) The Ocean Basins: Their Structure and Evolution, 2nd Edition (Open University Course)

2) The Sea Floor, An Intro to Marine Geology, 3rd Edition (Seibold and Berger)

Course Objectives: This course investigates the geology, processes, and paleoarchives hidden
beneath the world's oceans. The course material is necessarily broad, covering marine geography, plate tectonics, active and passive margins, coastal processes, ocean processes,
sediment processes, and climate interactions. However, we will focus on Lake Champlain and use a term-long research project to focus the curriculum. We will also investigate a few
specific case studies in detail to relate the course material to current events and the recent scientific literature.
A key objective of this course is for you to use the data and samples that we collect on the Lake Champlain research cruise to investigate specific scientific questions and test hypotheses
that we will develop together. We do not have a lab for this course, but we will use class time and homework assignments to work on these samples and data throughout the term. There
will be a final write-up and presentation on this project at the end of the term. A second objective is for you to use case studies to practice how to critically evaluate and
synthesize published marine geological data, and to construct, in writing, sound, logical, succinct arguments based on your analyses.

Course Requirements and Grading: Class Participation (10% of grade): Includes attending classes prepared, and promoting class interaction. We will also be using interactive classroom software which will include some questions for credit.

Homeworks (20% of grade): There will be 3-4 homework problem sets during the term. You will have ~1 week to complete each. Some of these may pertain to an aspect of the final
project, and some will be on the lecture material.

Abstracts (15% of grade): You will write an abstract for 3 published manuscripts (that I provide), one for each of the 3 "case studies" we investigate. This is intended to develop your critical reading and writing skills. The abstracts will be in the very specific format specified by Nature magazine (which is not the journal in which they were originally published). Detailed information about these assignments will follow.
Term Project (25% of grade): We will conduct a term-long project working with data and samples that we collect on the Lake Champlain research cruise. We will decide on the main topic and goals of this project together, and then likely break into smaller groups to focus on specific tasks. You will be responsible for writing up a final report and making a final presentation to the class.
Midterm Exam (15% of grade): Scheduled on Wed October 16th (subject to change)
Final Exam (15% of grade): Sunday November 24, 3:00 pm
Late Assignments: 10% will be deducted for each day that an assignment is late unless you discuss the situation with me prior to the original due date. If you are unable to complete an assignment on time due to illness or other personal reasons, you may be eligible to have this penalty waived. You are encouraged to talk to me as soon as possible, and if necessary, meet with your Dean to discuss your situation.
Unexpectedly Missing Quizzes and Exams: If you have to miss a quiz or exam, YOU MUST CONTACT ME BEFORE THE QUIZ OR EXAM STARTS to explain your absence and make plans for taking the exam/quiz at the next available time. Email (erich.c.osterberg@dartmouth.edu) and telephone (603-646-1096) are ways to contact me. If I do not answer the phone, leave a message! You may be expected to provide a letter from your doctor, dean, family member (etc.) explaining that your absence was justified.
FAILURE TO CONTACT ME BEFORE THE EXAM/QUIZ OR FAILURE TO PROVIDE A VALID REASON FOR YOUR ABSENCE MAY RESULT IN YOU
RECEIVING A 0% ON THE EXAM OR QUIZ
Planned Absences during Quizzes or Exams: If you know ahead of time that you will be absent from a quiz or exam (e.g. for a college-affiliated extra-curricular activity, job interview, etc.), speak with me about it as soon as you know so that accommodations can be made. In general, my policy is to allow students to take exams and quizzes early for a planned absence, but not to take it late unless there are special circumstances.
Disability-Related Accommodations: Students with disabilities enrolled in this course and who may need disability-related academic adjustments and services are encouraged to see me privately as early as possible in the term. Students requiring disability-related academic adjustments and services MUST consult the Student Accessibility Services office (301 Collis Student Center, 646-9900, student.accessibility.services@dartmouth.edu). Once SAS has

authorized services, students must show the originally signed SAS Services and Consent Form and/or a letter on SAS letterhead to me. As a first step, if students have questions about whether they qualify to receive academic adjustments and services, they should contact the SAS office. All inquiries and discussions will remain confidential.
Religious Observances: If you have a religious observance that conflicts with your participation in this course, please meet with me as early as possible to discuss accommodations.
Academic Honor Principle: You should be aware of and conform to the Dartmouth Honor Code as expressed in the ORC. For this course, this means:
Homeworks: You may discuss the homework problems with each other and work together towards solutions, but you must write up your solutions in your own words showing your thinking and work where appropriate.
Abstracts: The published papers for which you will be writing abstracts have existing abstracts as published. The papers as you receive them from me will have the abstracts removed, but you can easily find them online. You are expected not to do so. If you come across the published abstract and feel that you would like a different paper to work on, please see me.
Exams: All work on exams is your own.

Course Schedule (Subject to Change: Updated 9/10/13)

Date
9/16 (M) 9/17 (Tu) 9/18 (W) 9/20 (F) 9/23 (M) 9/25 (W) 9/27 (F) 9/30 (M) 10/1 (Tu) 10/2 (W) 10/4 (F) 10/7 (M) 10/9 (W) 10/11 (F) 10/14 (M) 10/15 (Tu) 10/16 (W) 10/18 (F) 10/21 (M) 10/23 (W) 10/25 (F) 10/28 (M) 10/30 (W) 11/1 (F) 11/4 (M) 11/6 (W) 11/8 (F) 11/11 (M) 11/13(W) 11/15 (F) 11/18 (M) 11/19 (Tu) 11/24 (Sun)

Topic
Course mechanics, into to Marine Geology X-Hour: Lake Champlain intro
Ocean basins & passive margins Special Class: Career Services Ocean Morphology III: Active Margins Continental drift, assembly of NE Formation and evolution of oceanic lithosphere Case Study I: 2011 Japan tsunami X-Hour: Lake Champlain project discussion Mid-Ocean Ridges and Hydrothermal activity
Lake Champlain Cruise Plate tectonics summary: bringing it together
Waves and currents Lithogenic sediments and near-shore processes
Case Study II: Mississippi Delta Erosion X-Hour: Review Session MID-TERM EXAM Biogenic Sediments Deep Sea Sediments I Deep Sea Sediments II Marine Sediments in VT Marine productivity
Paleoceanography and paleoclimate proxies Marine paleoclimate record Paleoceanography record
Plate tectonics and paleoclimate Sea-level I: causes of sea-level fluctuations Sea-level II: history of sea-level fluctuations
Case Study III: Future sea-level rise Ocean resources Final Presentations
X-Hour: Final Presentations (if needed) 3:00 pm: FINAL EXAM

Reading
Sea Floor: Intro & Ch 1 Sea Floor: Ch 2
Ocean Basins: Ch 2 Ocean Basins: Ch 3 Ocean Basins: Ch 4
Papers
Ocean Basins: Ch 5

Assignments Abstract #1 due

Sea Floor: Ch 4 Sea Floor: Sections 3.1-3.5
Papers

Abstract #2 due

Sea Floor: Sections 3.6-3.9 Sea Floor: Ch 8

Sea Floor: Ch 6 Sea Floor: Ch 7 Sea Floor: Ch 9
Ocean Basins: Ch 6 Sea Floor: Ch 5
Papers Sea Floor: Ch 10

Abstract #3 due

