Economics 44 Topics in Development Economics
Syllabus Winter 2013
Professor Eric Edmonds http://www.dartmouth.edu/~eedmonds
Description How will restrictions on the import of goods produced with child labor affect children living in poor countries?
The U.S. Government is moving towards restricting the import of goods produced by child labor or forced labor as are many European governments. In the U.S., the Trafficking Victims Protection and Reauthorization Act (TVPRA) of 2005 directs the U.S. Secretary of Labor to work with other departments and agencies of the U.S. Government to ensure that products made with forced labor and child labor in violation of international standards are not imported into the United States. The TVPRA of 2008 requires the U.S. Department of Labor to develop a list goods known to be produced with forced labor and child labor, and in December 2010, Labor Secretary Hilda Solis issued that list. This list has been revised annually since then. Relevant federal agencies have developed guidelines for the enforcement of prohibition on imports as well as implementing older portions of the Trade and Development Act (TDA) of 2000 that allowed the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) to be withdrawn from countries that are failing to eliminate the of worst forms of child labor in their countries. Those guidelines are currently being piloted.
Unfortunately, this policy is being formulated in an environment with insufficient independent research that meets modern standards of evidence. Students in this course will help reduce this void by generating an original research paper that examines the evidence of child or forced labor in products that are imported into the United States and on the TVPRA list. Student papers will be a combination of a critical review of existing evidence on the commodity, an analysis of cross-country data, and careful econometric analysis of detailed household level data for countries in question. For student papers to be of use to policymakers in the Departments of Labor, State, and Agriculture, they must be grounded in economic analysis. Students examine the current state of research on the determinants of schooling and child labor.
Other Information There is no textbook for this course. We read recently written working papers in the economics of child labor. Links to papers are available on the course blackboard site.
Grading is based on an original research paper, class participation, and student presentations of new research.
Check http://www.dartmouth.edu/~eedmonds/Teaching.html in early January 2013 for a complete syllabus

