B
SYLLABUS for Women and Politics (Gov 20.1 / WGST 31.4)
For Winter 2014
Professor Brooks
(Last Updated: 31 October 2013) ~ DRAFT version ~
Course Description:
This is a general course about gender and politics in which we will examine the roles of women and men as voters, activists, and politicians. We will begin by examining a wide range of relevant issues, including: how gender affects political participation and partisan preferences, how boys and girls are socialized differently into politics, how public opinion regarding domestic and foreign policy sometimes differs for women and men, and how a different gender balance among office holders might be expected to affect representation, policy, and governance. The course will then critically examine various barriers that women may face in the pursuit of elected office in the U.S., and we will also expand our view beyond politics, by analyzing women in non-political leadership positions in order to draw useful comparisons. Finally, the course will examine the role of gender in a comparative context, comparing gender dynamics in the U.S. with those of other countries in order to better understand the future of women in politics in the U.S. and in the world at large.
This course is appropriate for all students, from all majors (there are no prerequisites).
Some particular questions we will explore this quarter are:
How does political participation tend to differ (or not differ) between the sexes? Political knowledge? Political interest? What could be the sources of those differences? How early do they tend to start?
How do voting patterns tend to differ and not differ between men and women? Has that been changing over time? How can that affect the political power of different groups?
What key differences exist between the sexes regarding domestic policy preferences? Are there systematic differences between how men and women view foreign policy issues? In particular, are men "hawks" and women "doves" regarding war?
Does it make a difference if people are represented by people who are descriptively like them? That is, are women better represented by women? Are black women better represented by black women than Caucasian women or black men? What are the different facets of representation we should consider when answering these questions?
Do men and women govern differently? Do women leaders tend to have different leadership styles once in office?
Do women face different challenges than men when running for office? And do those factors make it disproportionately harder for women than men to win? Do and women politicians face gender stereotypes vis-à-vis the public? Does the public have higher standards for female than male political candidates? Do the media treat male and female candidates differently?
1

Do women face a particularly harder time obtaining executive office, as compared to legislative office? What are the prospects for a woman winning at the presidential level in the U.S. in the reasonably near future?
Why don't more women run for office? To what extent does that explain why there are relatively few women elected officials in the U.S.?
Do women face a harder or easier time obtaining leadership positions in politics versus business or law? Are women in politics more or less subject to gender stereotypes and different standards of performance than ordinary women? What can we learn about gender and politics by exploring gender dynamics for non-political women?
Why do many other countries tend to have a more representative gender balance in leadership than the U.S.? How does institutional structure influence the representation of women in office? Are there key cultural factors?
Are there generational differences in terms of how people think about issues of gender and politics? How might that affect the potential for change regarding gender and representation moving forward?
How do gender and power interact among high school students? Among Dartmouth undergraduates? What dynamics are you likely to face in your future careers, in or outside of politics? Is there still a power imbalance that tends to favor men or women? If so, are there solutions? To what extent do solutions rest with women, and to what extent do they rest with all people?
Required Books to Purchase:
Jennifer Lawless and Richard Fox. 2010. It Still Takes a Candidate. Cambridge University Press. 978-0521179249
Deborah Jordan Brooks. 2013. He Runs, She Runs: Why Gender Stereotypes Do Not Harm Women Candidates. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. 978-0691153421
Other Books for the Course:
Read a book about writing and/or promoting a blog. Get it RIGHT AWAY ­ you need to read it during the first week of the course (the goal is for people in each blog project group to have been exposed to a variety of ideas from different sources, so rush order one online that interests you, download one, find one at the library, and/or go to a bookstore and pick one off the shelf.
In conjunction with your blog group, choose a book to review on your blog about gender dynamics, politics, and/or leadership that you think would be a good book for teen girls to consider reading. You will negotiate the timing of your review with your group early on in the quarter.
Core Readings:
Most readings for this course consist primarily of journal articles and selections from books.
"BB": A "BB" on the syllabus means check Blackboard, under the "Readings" section. The article may be posted there, or there may be a link or other directions for how to access the material.
2

Note: This is a rapidly evolving topic so I reserve the right to alter the readings on the syllabus once the quarter is in progress. If a reading is changed, an announcement will be posted on Blackboard to that effect. You can expect that additional readings (especially timely news articles) will be added once the quarter is in progress.
Other Readings:
General Newspaper Reading: Reading a good daily national newspaper will help you in all of your government classes. You will not be "tested" on newspaper reading in this course, per se, but regular readership of a good national paper will make it easier for you to be an effective contributor to class discussions. Some recommendations for a good daily paper include the New York Times and/or the Wall Street Journal.
Other Assignments/Readings: The political environment changes every day and, as such, small assignments, additional news article readings, and/or attendance at local political events may be required as part of the course, and may not be reflected ahead of time on this syllabus. Such assignments will factor into your participation grade.
X-Hours:
This course typically meets in the 12 time period, which is 12:30-1:35 MWF. The X-hour is 1:00-1:50 on Tuesday. You are expected to keep the X-hour time period available; however, it is generally used to make up for that need to be cancelled. You will find that the X-hour can also be a useful tool for scheduling meetings with small groups for class projects, since everyone should have that time available in their schedule.
Occasionally we might have a guest speaker who can only meet with us outside of normal class times; in such situations, you should try your best to attend, but alternative assignments can be arranged if necessary.
Office Hours:
My office hours are Tuesday 10:30-12:45. I have scheduled my office hours to be sure that that at least part of the office hours do not overlap with other classes, so that everyone will be able to attend. For office hours, just sign up on sheet posted outside of my office door (at 231 Silsby Hall), or it usually also works to just stop by during the office hour time period. Also, after class usually tends to be good time to catch me for relatively quick questions (and sometimes my schedule allows for longer ones, as well).
I like to get to know each student in my classes, so I would like for you to come to office hours at least once fairly early on in the term to touch base, and ideally more than that as questions, concerns, or ideas arise. Your grade will not be affected either way by your attendance at office hours -- it is purely for your own benefit, and will not affect your participation grade at all. An exception, however, is that sometimes office hours are required for group project; if that is the case for this class, it will be announced in class.
Course Pace:
This syllabus shows which readings need to be completed before the date posted for that section on the syllabus. Failure to complete the readings by that time will undermine your ability to contribute to class discussion and so is likely to affect your participation grade. You are expected to participate
3

actively and intelligently during class discussions, and you cannot do so without completing the readings on time. Course Policies: Please read the "General Course Policies" handout which will be given out on the first day of class and will also be posted on Blackboard. I feel that clarity on the front end prevents confusion and miscommunication later on in a class; as such, that document describes my general expectations and policies for the course. After reading that document, please let me know if you have any questions. I would especially like to highlight the need for you to be at class right when it starts and to check Blackboard announcements several times per week. Those are two ways that I regularly communicate to everyone in the class. Students who miss the first few minutes of class and/or who do not check Blackboard announcements often end up missing critical information without realizing it.
4

Course Grade Components:
15% = Class Participation
o Your active, high-quality participation in the classroom discussion and class activities will be reflected in this part of your grade. Note that your active participation needs to be spread evenly throughout the course; dynamic participation part of the time and silence (or absence) for multiple class meetings will affect your participation grade.
o I occasionally use in-class writing exercises with guided prompts to allow students time at the start of a class to get people thinking about the readings; additionally, some short written assignments are included on the syllabus. Such assignments are part of participating in the course.
20% = Response Paper #1
o 4-5 pages, double spaced, on an assigned topic using assigned readings from the class.
20% = Response Paper #2
o 4-5 pages, double spaced, on an assigned topic using assigned readings from the class.
30% = Response Paper #3
o 5-7 pages, double spaced, on an assigned topic using assigned readings from the class.
15% = Engaging the Next Generation Blog Project (5% group grade & 10% individual grade)
o You will work with a large group to design and execute a blog with the mission of engaging 13-15 year old girls in American politics (why? Because that is an age range during which girls have been found to become less interested in politics and leadership than boys, and your job is to grapple with challenges of trying to change that via one possible low-cost avenue.) Each group will have considerable creative power over the nature of the blog.
o Throughout the quarter, you personally will be responsible for several "core" blog posts, each roughly 2-4 paragraphs in length, that pertain directly to some aspect of gender dynamics, politics, and/or leadership that is relevant to the course, and several other short blog posts that may, or may not, pertain directly to politics. In other words, you should be writing 1 blog post per week, from the second week of the course through the second to last week of the class, and you need to work with your group to make sure that the blog posts are distributed in an engaging manner. (Note: Each blog with have a manager/editor, who will have fewer writing responsibilities but more coordinating responsibilities, and her/his grade calculation will be different.)
o Your group is responsible for making your blog as informative to that target audience as you can, while also making your blog as engaging as possible to members of that target audience. If your blog is only engaging, while not being informative, it has not succeeded in its mission; similarly, if it is only informative, while not being especially engaging, it has also not succeeded in its mission. You need to achieve both goals to be successful. Your blog needs to seem organized, engaging, and logical ­ i.e., it should be strategically designed with respect to its title and design, have a logical flow to the topics of the posts, have posts released at regular intervals, and be designed with the target audience in mind.
o Your individual writing will be judged according to blog standards (that is, relatively short and punchy, "click worthy" titles, an engaging hook at the start, well edited) age-appropriate writing standards (that is, written to engage 13-15 year old girls), and useful learning content for your "core" articles (that is, material that is accurate, directly relevant to the course, and that would benefit 13-15 year old girls to know.) Work to engage readers actively, rather than only passively in order to increase engagement. One possible difference from the standard of typical blog posts, however, is that you must cite sources according to academic standards. Your individual grade (and group grade) will be penalized if you do not release your articles at regularly-spaced intervals.
5

Overview of Gender in Society and Politics

WEEK #1 - Jan 7 (Mon) & Jan 9 (Wed) & Jan 11 (Fri)

TOPIC OVERVIEW: Before we can start to understand the relationship between gender and politics, it is critical to start by understanding how gender functions in society more generally. In so doing, we provide a foundation with which gender and politics can be compared and contrasted throughout the course. Along the way, key terms will be defined and overarching theories will be introduced. We will also start to consider how different generations might tend to consider matters pertaining to gender and politics in different ways.

Mon, Jan 6: Introduction to Women & Politics

Wed, Jan 8: Gender and Society

NOTE: Find & start reading a book (any book) on How to Blog (see above under "Other books for the course"). Finish it by next Tuesday.

 [BB] Richard L. Lippa. 2005. pp. 12-44 of "What's the Difference Anyway" (Ch. 1) in Gender, Nature, and Nurture, Second Edition. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Fri, Jan 10: Gender, Generation, & Leadership

 [BB] Kathleen P. Iannello. 2006. "The Political is Personal: Third-Wave Feminist Perspectives on Power," in Women in Politics: Outsiders or Insiders, Fourth Edition, edited by Lois Duke Whitaker. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Education, Inc.

 [BB] Anne-Marie Slaughter. 2012. "Why Women Still Can't Have It All." The Atlantic., July/­ August 2012.

 [VIDEO LINK] Sheryl Sandberg. 2013. TED Talk ­ "Why we have too few women leaders" (15 minutes) (Note: Sandberg is the author of Lean In.) http://www.ted.com/talks/sheryl_sandberg_why_we_have_too_few_women_leaders.html)

 [BB] Anne-Marie Slaughter. March 7, 2013. "Yes, You Can: Sheryl Sandberg's `Lean In.' New York Times Sunday Book Review.
 INTERVIEW ASSIGNMENT: Before class, interview a female relative or family friend who is at least 25 years
older than you. How did she feel about feminism and feminists when she was your age? Now? Does she feel that women have achieved more or less in the U.S. politically and socially (or her own country, if she isn't American) than she thought they would have by this point? Does she think women today have more or fewer challenges than her generation faced? What does she believe the biggest challenges for women in your generation will be moving forward? WHAT TO TURN IN: Summarize her most illuminating points in a page of bullet points to turn in at the start of class; protect her privacy by not including her last name on the sheet but do include her age, whether she had children or not, and her profession if she worked outside of the home.

6

Gender and Political Engagement
WEEK #2 - Jan 14 (Mon) & Jan 16 (Wed) & Jan 18 (Fri)
TOPIC OVERVIEW: This week, we will explore the role of women as citizen participants in politics. How can we measure political participation and political engagement? How does the participation of men versus women differ in the U.S.? To what degree might participation and engagement be affected by differing political knowledge levels? How might early exposure to politics vary for boys and for girls, and potentially be responsible for some of the gender differences in adults that are observed?
Mon, Jan 13: Gender & Political Participation ­ Different Forms of Participation
 Nancy E. McGlen, Karen O'Connor, Laura van Assendelft, and Wendy Gunther-Canada. 2011. "Women's Movements in America," Introduction in Women, Politics, and American Society, Fifth Edition. Longman: New York.
 [BB] Sidney Verba, Kay Lehman Schlozman, and Henry Brady. 1995. "Who participates? Race, Ethnicity, and Gender," in Voice and Equality: Civic Voluntarism in American Politics. Cambridge Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. (NOTE: Focus, in particular, on pp. 251-266 ­ note: their results for turnout are incorrect: women turnout at higher levels than men, but focus primarily on other forms of participation)
 [BB ­ OPTIONAL BACKGROUND] Nancy E. McGlen, Karen O'Connor, Laura van Assendelft, and Wendy Gunther-Canada. 2011. "The Struggle for Political Rights," Chapter 1 in Women, Politics, and American Society. Longman: New York.
Tues, Jan 14 ­ x-hour (1:00-1:50): Blog Planning Bootcamp
Wed, Jan 15: Gender & Political Participation ­ Political Knowledge
 [BB] Michael Delli Carpini and Scott Keeter. 2005, "Gender and Political Knowledge," Chapter 2 in Gender and American Politics: Women, Men, and the Political Process, 2nd edition, Sue TollesonRinehart and Jyl J. Josephson (eds.) New York: M.E. Sharp, Inc.
 [BB] Jeffrey J. Mondak and Mary R. Anderson. 2004. "The Knowledge Gap: A Reexamination of Gender-Based Differences in Political Knowledge." Journal of Politics 66(2). (NOTE: Focus on pp. 492498 + 509-511)
Fri, Jan 17: Gender & Political Participation ­ Political Socialization
 [BB] Marc Hooghe and Dietlind Stolle. 2004. "Good Girls Go to the Polling Booth, Bad Boys Go Everywhere: Gender Differences in Anticipated Political Participation among American FourteenYear Olds. Women & Politics 26 (3/4).
 [BB} Jennifer Wolak and Michael McDevitt. 2011. "The Roots of the Gender Gap in Political Knowledge in Adolescence." Political Behavior 33(3).
 [BB] David E. Campbell and Christina Wolbrecht. 2006. "See Jane Run: Women Politicians as Role Models for Adolescents." Journal of Politics 68. 7

Gender, Partisanship, & Public Policy
WEEK #3 ­ No Mon (MLK Day) & Jan 23 (Wed) & Jan 25 (Fri)
TOPIC OVERVIEW: In order to understand the relationship between gender and politics, it is important to understand the extent to which women and men differ in their voting patterns and policy preferences. Are female voters from Mars and male voters from Venus, or do they tend to be more similar than they might initially appear? The "Gender Gap" represents a pervasive, partisan difference between male and female voters in the U.S. in recent decades; we will study it and we will also expand the concept beyond partisanship to consider gender gaps that are observed for some kinds of policies but not others.
(NO CLASS on Mon, Jan 20 ­ MLK Day )
Wed, Jan 22: The Gender Gap & Public Policy
 [BB] Susan Carroll. 2010. "Voting Choices: The Politics of the Gender Gap," Chapter 4 in Gender and Elections: Shaping the Future of American Politics, 2nd ed. By Susan J. Carroll and Richard L. Fox (eds.)
 [BB] Ronald Inglehart and Pippa Norris. 2010. "The Developmental Theory of the Gender Gap: Women's and Men's Voting Behavior in Global Perspective." In Women, Gender, and Politics: A Reader, edited by Mona Lena Krook and Sarah Childs. New York: Oxford University Press.
 [BB] Nate Silver. 2012. " `Gender Gap' Near Historic Highs." The New York Times, Five Thirty Eight Blog, October 21, 2012. (http://fivethirtyeight.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/10/21/gender-gapnear-historic-highs/)
 [BB] Philip Rucker. February 5, 2013. "Women Front and Center in Gun Debate: To Some, Guns Have Brought Grief, For Others They Offer Protection." An article from The Washington Post published in the Valley News.
Fri, Jan 24: The Gender Gap & Public Policy
 [BB] Deborah Jordan Brooks and Benjamin Valentino. 2011. "A War of One's Own: Understanding the Gender Gap in Support for War," Public Opinion Quarterly, forthcoming.
8

Gender & Representation
WEEK #4 - Jan 28 (Mon) & Jan 30 (Wed) & Feb 1 (Fri)
TOPIC OVERVIEW: How would having more women in office change politics? Is the value of it primarily symbolic or would policy outcomes likely be different? Do women leaders vote differently once in office than their male counterparts? Do they tend to propose different kinds of legislation? Are they more likely to express views that will be unrepresented otherwise? More generally, to the extent that the values might come into conflict, is it more important that women's policy preferences be represented accurately or that women be represented by women? And is the value of descriptive representation for women the same as the value of descriptive representation for other groups, such as racial or ethnic minorities, and/or gays or lesbians?
Mon, Jan 27: Gender & Representation
 [BB] Beth Reingold. 2008. "Women as Officeholders: Linking Descriptive and Substantive Representation" in Political Women and American Democracy, edited by Christina Wolbrecht, Karen Beckwith, and Lisa Baldez. New York: Cambridge University Press.
 [BB] Michelle Swers. 2001. "Understanding the Policy Impact of Electing Women: Evidence from Research on Congress and State Legislatures ." PS: Political Science and Politics 34(2).
 [BB] Dennis Simon and Barbara Palmer. 2010. "The Roll Call Behavior of Men and Women in the U.S. House of Representatives, 1937-2008. Politics & Gender 6. (NOTE: Focus on pp. 225-230 & pp. 242-243]
 [BB] Kathryn Pearson and Logan Dancey. 2011. "Speaking for the Underrepresented in the House of Representatives: Voicing Women's Interests in a Partisan Era," Politics & Gender 7. (NOTE: Focus on pp. 910-913 & pp. 920-921]
XXX: PAPER #1 DUE ­ XXX
Wed, Jan 29: Gender & Representation
 Linda L. Carli and Alice H. Eagly. 2007. "Overcoming Resistance to Women Leaders: The Importance of Leadership Style," Chapter 3 of Barbara Kellerman and Deborah L. Rhode (eds.) Women and Leadership: The State of Play and Strategies for Change. San Francisco, California: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Fri, Jan 31: Gender & Representation
9

Candidate Gender ­ Winning over the Public
WEEK #5 ­ Feb 4 (Mon) + Feb 6 (Wed) - (no Fri - Carnival)
TOPIC OVERVIEW: Why are there fewer women than men in office in the U.S. and in most countries in the world? One prevalent explanation is the idea that the public applies gender stereotypes to women candidates that hurt them relative to their male counterparts. Moreover, women are often assumed to face higher standards than male candidates while on the campaign trail. To what extent does the U.S. public apply gender stereotypes and/or have higher expectations of ordinary women than ordinary men, and to what extent might we expect those views to carry over to public opinion about candidates? Can it help to explain the parity problem? We will be exploring those questions this week.
Mon, Feb 3: Women Candidates & Public Opinion
 [BROOKS BOOK] Deborah Jordan Brooks, 2013 (forthcoming, Princeton University Press), He Runs, She Runs: Gender Stereotypes, Double Standards, and Political Campaigns. (read book this week).
[NOTE: Likely X-hour to watch the documentary "Fourteen Women"­ check Blackboard] Wed, Feb 5: Women Candidates & Public Opinion
Fri, Feb 7 ­ no class [Carnival holiday]
10

Candidate Gender ­ Running for Office
WEEK #6 - Feb 11 (Mon) & Feb 13 (Wed) & Feb 15 (Fri)
TOPIC OVERVIEW: How much of the parity problem resides with the fact that not enough women run for office? Why do so few women run? How do potential women candidates view their own qualifications for office differently than comparable men? How might they view the process of campaigning differently than men? And are women less likely to be recruited for office than their male counterparts? Do potential women candidates perceive that they face bigger hurdles to winning than their male counterparts, and to what extent might that affect their willingness to throw their hats into the ring? In other words, if gender stereotypes and double standards do not explain why there aren't more women in office in the U.S., what are the most likely explanations for it?
Mon, Feb 10: Gender & the Decision to Run
 [LAWLESS & FOX BOOK] Jennifer Lawless and Richard Fox. 2010. It Still Takes a Candidate. Cambridge University Press.
 [BB ­ OPTIONAL] Muriel Niderle and Lise Vesterland. 2007. "Do Women She Away from Competition? Do Men Compete Too Much?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2007. (NOTE: Skim for general idea - focus on pp. 1067-1073 & pp. 1096-1100 in particular)
Wed, Feb 12: Gender & the Decision to Run
TIP: Read ahead to Friday
Fri, Feb 14: Gender & Leadership ­ Politics vs. other professions
 [BOOK] Alice H. Eagly and Linda L. Carli. 2007. "Is There Still a Glass Ceiling?" Chapter 1 in Through the Labyrinth: The truth about how women become leaders. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation.
 [BOOK] Alice H. Eagly and Linda L. Carli. 2007. "Where are the Women Leaders?" Chapter 2 in Through the Labyrinth: The truth about how women become leaders. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation.
 [BOOK] Alice H. Eagly and Linda L. Carli. 2007. "How Good are Women Leaders and What Does Their Future Hold?" Chapter 11 in Through the Labyrinth: The truth about how women become leaders. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation.
11

 [BB] Maraget S. Williams. 2008. "Ambition, Gender, and the Judiciary." Political Research Quarterly 61(1).
 [BB - OPTIONAL] Lori Cox Han. 2010. "Women in the Judiciary," Chapter 7 in Women in U.S. Politics: The Spectrum of Political Leadership, Second Edition. Boulder, Colorado: Lynne Rienner Publishers.
12

Candidate Gender ­ The Media & Gender in Politics
WEEK #7 - Feb 18 (Mon) & Feb 20 (Wed) & Feb 22 (Fri)
TOPIC OVERVIEW: From Tucker Carlson's comments about Hillary Clinton on MSNBC ("There's just something about her that feels castrating, overbearing, and scary") to Rush Limbaugh's attacks on female candidates on the radio ("Mrs. Clinton's testicle lockbox is big enough for the entire Democrat hierarchy") and many other comments made about female candidates in the media in recent elections, it is clear that female candidates sometimes face extremely demeaning media commentary. But to what extent does media coverage tend to differ systematically for male versus female candidates? How might recent changes in the media be expected to affect media coverage of women candidates? To what extent can we explain the parity problem through differences in media coverage?
Mon, Feb 17: Candidate Gender & the Media
 [BB] Kim Kahn. 1994. "The Distorted Mirror: Press Coverage of Women Candidates for Statewide Office," The Journal of Politics.
 [BB] Dianne Bystrom. 2010. "Advertising, Web Sites, and Media Coverage: Gender and Communication along the Campaign Trail," in Gender and Elections: Shaping the Future of American Politics, 2nd ed. By Susan J. Carroll and Richard L. Fox (eds.) New York: Oxford University Press.
 [BB] Melissa Miller, Jeffrey Peake, and Brittany Anne Boulton. 2010. "Testing the Saturday Night Live Hypothesis: Fairness and Bias in Newspaper Coverage of Hillary Clinton's Presidential Campaign." Politics & Gender 6.
ASSIGNMENT to complete before class on Monday: Choose any female candidate other than
Sarah Palin or Hillary Clinton about whom you can find at least 15 fairly substantial newspaper articles (i.e., more than just poll results) on Lexis-Nexis in the last six weeks or so of the election. Read at least 15 newspaper articles about that candidate and her opponent in that race; also read at least 10 articles about a comparable male candidate in a different race (i.e., same incumbency status, same type of office, same time period, roughly the same level of likelihood of winning going into the race, etc.) Can you tease out any differences in coverage that you think may be due to candidate gender? Write up your answer in about a page to turn in during class.
Wed, Feb 19: No class meeting - Watch Miss Representation via Blackboard
 Use Wed class time to finalize comparative research exercise
Fri, Feb 21: Candidate Gender & the Media ­ Discuss Miss Representation
XXXX: PAPER #2 DUE ­ XXX
13

Gender & Politics in Comparative Perspective
WEEK #8 - Feb 25 (Mon) & Feb 27 (Wed) & Mar 1 (Fri)
TOPIC OVERVIEW: We will move at this point to an explicit analysis of gender and politics in a comparative context. To what extent do the dynamics for gender and political leadership that we identified earlier in the class apply in non-U.S. contexts? Are there other dynamics that are critical elsewhere but not relevant in the U.S.? What can the U.S. potentially learn from other countries about gender and leadership, and what can other countries potentially learn from the U.S.?
Mon, Feb 24: Gender & Politics in Comparative Perspective
 [BB] Sarah Henderson and Alana S. Jeydel. 2010. "Women and Institutional Politics," in Women and Politics in a Global World. New York: Oxford University Press.
 [BB] Farida Jalazai and Mona Lena Krook. 2010. "Beyond Hillary and Benazir: Women's Political Leadership Worldwide," International Political Science Review 31(5).
 Read a CASE STUDY about gender & leadership in two other countries (of your choosing) to get a sense of how gender dynamics there are similar and/or different to those in the U.S.
Wed, Feb 26: Gender & Politics in Comparative Perspective
 [BB] Pippa Norris and Ronald Inglehart. 2005. "Women as Political Leaders Worldwide: Cultural Barriers and Opportunities," Chapter 13 in Women and Elective Office: Past, Present, and Future, 2nd ed., edited by Sue Thomas and Clyde Wilcox. Armonk, New York: M.E. Sharpe.
 [BB] Farida Jalazi. 2010. "Madam President: Gender, Power, and the Comparative Presidency." Journal of Women, Politics & Policy 31(2).
****
Fri, Feb 28: Blog analysis: Considering the next generation
14

Gender, Politics, & Progress Moving Forward
WEEK #9 - Mar 4 (Mon) & Mar 6 (Wed) & Mar 8 (Fri)
TOPIC OVERVIEW: We will have spent the quarter examining the past and current status of women in politics. This week represents a key opportunity to consider the future of women in politics. Based on what you have learned this quarter in our readings and course discussions, this is an opportunity for you to consider what is working and what needs to be changed on campus, in politics, and beyond politics with reference to women and leadership moving forward.
Mon, Mar 3: Gender, Politics, & Progress ­ Succeeding Close to Home
 [BB] Ann M. Beutel and Donna J. Nelson. 2006. "The gender and race-ethnicity of faculty in top social science research departments," The Social Science Journal 43.
 [BB] Elizabeth Currid-Halkett. 2012. "Can Women in Academia Have it All?," LA Times, August 21, 2012.
 [BB] MaryAnn Baenniger. October 2, 2011. "For Women on Campuses, Access Doesn't Equal Success." The Chronicle of Higher Education.
Wed, Mar 5: Gender, Politics, & Progress ­ Succeeding Outside of Politics
 [BB] Alice H. Eagly and Linda L. Carli. 2007. "How Do Some Women Find Their Way Through the Labyrinth?" Chapter 10 in Through the Labyrinth: The truth about how women become leaders. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation.
 [BB] Kantor, Jody. Feb 21, 2013. "A Titan's How-To on Breaking the Glass Ceiling." The New York Times.
Fri, Mar 7: Gender, Politics, & Progress ­ Succeeding Within Politics
 [BB] Kathryn Pearson. 2010. "Demographic Change and the Future of Congress." PS ­ Politics and Society, April 2010.
 [BB] Drude Dahlerup. 2007. "Will Gender Balance in Politics Come by Itself?," Chapter 7 of Barbara Kellerman and Deborah L. Rhode (eds.) Chapter 7 of Barbara Kellerman and Deborah L. Rhode (eds.) Women and Leadership: The State of Play and Strategies for Change. San Francisco, California: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 [BB] Eleanor Clift and Tom Brazaitis. 2000. "A How-to for Women" in Madam President: Shattering the Last Glass Ceiling.
 [BB] Pamela Paxton and Meanie M. Hughes. 2007. "Where do we go from here and how do we get there?" Chapter 10 in Women, Politics, and Power: A Global Perspective. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications.
15

 [BB] Marie C. Wilson. 2004. "Parting Words: The Voice of Experience," Chapter 9 in Closing the Leadership Gap: Why Women Can and Must Help Run the World. London: Penguin Books.
WEEK #10 ­ Finals Week - Paper Due
The final paper for this course is due on Tues, March 11 at 11:00 am.
Final paper:  The final paper will be on an assigned topic and will allow you to bring together your knowledge of the course material (course readings + course lectures + course discussions.) It is not a research paper.  You will get the paper topic the day after the last day of class.  See instructions for turning the paper in on the paper topic sheet when it is handed out. It will not be a problem for this class if you will be off-campus during finals week (you will have the option to turn it in via email with no hard copy if you will not be in Hanover; see instructions for that particular situation).  There will be no final exam for this course.
Reminder: Check Blackboard regularly for reading changes. Given the dynamic nature of this topic, not all readings are listed, and more may be added as the course
proceeds.
16

