Government 7 Winter 2013/10A Dartmouth College 201f Carpenter

Professor Lisa Baldez Silsby 114; 646-0762 lisa.baldez@dartmouth.edu Ofc hrs: W 10-12, 3:00-3:50
and by appointment

Politics and Culture of Cuba

Course Description

What does the future hold for Cuba? In order to answer this question, this class plumbs the past for clues. We evaluate the creation and persistence of myths about Cuban history, focusing on the War of 1898, the First and Second Republican periods, and the many phases of the Revolution. As one of the world's few remaining socialist regimes and the only surviving socialist regime in Latin America, Cuba is unique. But Cuba is also subject to many of the forces that have shaped other countries in Latin America and the third world: a heritage of Spanish colonialism and slavery, a geography that contains a limited array of natural resources and a system of government that has evolved under the constant shadow of the United States. To that extent we can learn something about Latin American politics--and politics more generally--by studying Cuba. This seminar focuses specifically on relations between Cuba and the United States and examines a range of data and perspectives from both countries.

Learning Objectives

By the end of this course, you should be able to do the following

 Demonstrate an understanding of the main events of Cuban political history
and US foreign policy toward Cuba from 1898 to the present day  Explain what the Cuban revolutionary government set out to do and to what
extent it has succeeded  Explain how the goals of the Cuban revolution have changed over time  Demonstrate an understanding of the difference between history and
historiography  Identify competing arguments about and interpretations of political events  Locate, evaluate and properly cite sources for an academic research paper  Critique scholarly work in terms of argument, methodology, evidence and
overall logic  Make arguments in writing and speaking that present a clear thesis, valid
claims and persuasive evidence  Engage in thoughtful revisions of written work  Discuss and evaluate different models of good and bad writing

Required Texts

The following books are on sale at the Dartmouth Bookstore and Wheelock Books, and on reserve in Baker-Berry.

Julia E. Sweig, Cuba: What Everyone Needs to Know. Oxford University Press, 2009. Louis Pérez, The War of 1898.University of North Carolina Press,

There are also some online articles, some short and some long. You can access them on the Blackboard site under "Assigned Readings."

Watch the following films before classon the day indicated on the syllabus. They have been digitized and uploaded to the blackboard website, so you can watch them on your own computer: Crucible of Empire and Portrait of Teresa. We will watch "Cuba: The Forty Years War" in class.

Assignments

Participation Blog posts Annotated bibliography Research Paper Prospectus Complete draft Team Teaching Final paper

5% 20% 10% 15%
5% 10% 35%

x10 February 7 February 19 March 3 March 5 or 7 March 13

1. Participation

5%

This class is a seminar that will include discussion, work during done class time and some lecture. Close reading of the assigned material is only the first step of learning. Much of the work of processing information and generating ideas takes place through talking, listening and debating. I expect you to arrive on time every day. I expect you to participate regularly. I expect you to do all the assigned reading, think about how the readings address the discussion questions, and come to class prepared to engage. If you miss a class, you miss whatever discussion and learning we do that day. Class is a collective endeavor that cannot be "made up."

2. Blog Posts

20%

You will do ten different kinds of writing exercises over the course of the term. I am calling them "blog posts" because you will post most of them in a blog format that everyone will read. They will not be graded but you need to do a good enough job on them to get credit. The posts should demonstrate engagement with the assigned material for that particular class. Use perfect spelling and grammar. If I'm not satisfied with the quality of one of your posts, I may ask you to redo it. These
2   

exercises allow you to practice writing, to get your ideas flowing, and to enhance the depth of your engagement with the material in class. Many of these entries are "practice" for graded assignments. The specific instructions for each one are posted on the blackboard site. Please post your entry by 8am on the day that class meets.

3. Annotated Bibliography

10%

The main assignment for this course is a research paper. You will write the paper in stages over the semester. First, you will come up with a general topic you'd like to learn more about. Once you have a general topic, you'll be assigned to a research team of others working on similar topics. Each of you will identify academic sources on that topic. You will generate a list of ten academic sources and write an annotated bibliography on FIVE of them. For each article, you will write a paragraph that

a. Concisely summarizes the central question and main argument of the source,
b. Describes the methodology, c. Assess the main strengths and weaknesses of the scholarship, and d. Analyzes its relevance to your research paper.

The bibliography is due at the beginning of class on Thursday, February 7.

4. Research Paper Prospectus

15%

Once you have done a critical analysis of some of your sources, you will be ready to write a research prospectus. Write a 3-5 page description of the central question that motivates your research, why you consider it to be interesting and important, and explains the hypotheses you have derived from your analysis of the five sources. Include a formal bibliography of additional sources that you plan to use and incorporate sources from class if possible. The prospectus is due at the beginning of class on Tuesday, February 19. Upload the paper to blackboard.

5. Draft of Final Paper

5%

Write a complete draft of the paper, with perfect spelling, grammar and punctuation. Include a properly formatted bibliography. Upload the paper to Blackboard by 7:00am on Sunday, March 3.I will grade the drafts and return them to you in time for you to make a final set of revisions. You will receive a grade on this assignment and ample suggestions for revising and improving the paper for the final version.

6. Team Teaching

10%

3   

Each of the four research teams will teach one class period. They will organize the curriculum around their research projects. The objective of this assignment is to share your research with your peers, what academics sometimes call "public dissemination of research." We will determine the assessment rubric as a class, but I will propose the following criteria for starters:

 How well developed your presentation of your research is  How well you can elicit discussion  How carefully you prepare for class  The degree to which you present your peers with a challenge  The fit between the material you cover and the assessment you design

Post the material we need to read to prepare for your class on blackboard. The dates for each team will be assigned in class.

7. Final paper

35%

Upload the paper to Blackboard by Wednesday, March 13 at noon.I will submit the best papers for consideration for the Dickerson Prize (http://www.dartmouth.edu/~writing/courses/dickerson.shtml).

Class Outline

Date TBA Reunion with students from Govt 7 W10 at Professor Baldez's house

T Jan 8

Introductions/Film as Text Watch before class: "Crucible of Empire" (digitized version online) Blog post #1

Th Jan 10

Is it the Spanish-American War or the War of 1898?
What is the difference between history and historiography? Read: Louis Pérez, The War of 1898,pp. 1-107.
Blog post #2

T Jan 15

Does our telling of history change history? Read: Louis Pérez, The War of 1898,pp. 108-133.
Blog post #3

Th Jan 17

Part I: Why didn't Cuba become a democracy after
independence? Read: Julia E. Sweig, Cuba: What Everyone Needs to Know,pp. 1-35
Blog post #4

Part II: Finding Sources Workshop Visit from Fran Oscadal, Reference Bibliographer
4   

*Please bring your laptop to class

T Jan 22

What is/was the revolution? Read: Julia E. Sweig, Cuba: What Everyone Needs to Know, pp. 36-103
Blog post #5

Th Jan 24

Making Arguments with Photography Class meets in the Bernstein Study Center today. We will have a workshop on the Dartmouth Collection of Max Baltermans' photographs of the Cuban Revolution. Blog post #6

T Jan 29

Research Workshop Reflection on Baltermans photos Read: The Communist Manifesto Blog Post #7

Th Jan 31

Marx and Engel's Theory of Revolution Discussion of the Communist Manifesto

T Feb 5

How revolutionary was the revolution? Watch "Portrait of Teresa" before class (digitized version online) Read: Julie Marie Bunck, Chs. 1 and 3 Blog post #8 (two parts)

Th Feb 7

US Foreign Policy Toward Cuba
We will watch 40 Years War during class today (52 minutes) Read: Remaking the Relationship: The United States and Latin America,pp. 1-20.
Annotated bibliography due today

T Feb 12

Why didn't the Castro government collapse after 1989? Read: Julia E. Sweig, pp. 126-206

Th Feb 14 The Economics of the Revolution Read: Article by Javier Corrales and misc. news articles.

T Feb 19

Research Workshop Research prospectus due by beginning of class

Th Feb 21

What does freedom mean to Cubans? Read: Article by Sujatha Fernandes. Blog post #9

T Feb 26  

What's happening now? What does the future hold? 5 

Read: Julia E. Sweig, Cuba: What Everyone Needs to Know,pp. 207-256 and news articles posted on blackboard site. Blog post #10

Th Feb 28 Team Teaching Prep

Sun Mar 3 Upload draft of final paper by 7am

T Mar 5

Team teaching: Groups 1 and 2

Th Mar 7 Team teaching: Groups 3 and 4

Wed Mar 13 Upload final paper to blackboard by noon

Class Policies

1. The Honor Principle. All Dartmouth students have agreed to conduct themselves in accordance with the Standards of Conduct in general and with the Academic Honor Principle in particular. Plagiarism will not be tolerated. If you plagiarize, you risk failing the class and having your case brought before the Committee on Standards. Read the code again, here: http://www.dartmouth.edu/~uja/honor/We will discuss the ways in which the Honor Principle is relevant to the work you will do in class and I am more than happy to answer any questions you have about it.

2. X-Hours. I will use x-hours on an "as needed" basis, to catch up if we get behind in our coverage of course material, to schedule meetings with visitors on campus, or to make up class if I am out sick. If I schedule them, I will try to let you know a week in advance. I am generally available to meet with you during the x hour.

3. Late assignments(even an hour late) will be penalized one-third grade per
day. This includes weekends. If you think you might have a problem getting an assignment in on time, contact me beforethe assignment is due.

4. Using laptops and other electronic devices in class. You may use your laptop to take notes during lectures, but not during discussions. You may not access email or the Internet during class.

5. Blackboard web site. This syllabus provides an overview of our schedule for the term, but the real structure of the course is the Blackboard web site. I use blackboard to post lecture outlines (outlines,i.e., not the full text), links that are relevant to material in class, announcements, copies of all handouts, regular feedback, and any changes to the schedule

6   

6. Learning Disabilities.Students with disabilities enrolled in this course and who may need disability-related classroom accommodations are encouraged to make an appointment to see me before the end of the second week of the term. All discussions will remain confidential, although the Student Accessibility Services office may be consulted to discuss appropriate implementation of any accommodation requested.
7. Religious Observance.Some students may wish to take part in religious observances that occur during this academic term. If you have a religious observance that conflicts with your participation in the course, please meet with me before the end of the second week of the term to discuss appropriate accommodations.
7   

