DARTMOUTH COLLEGE Winter Term 2014
GOVERNMENT 40: DEMOCRACY, EUROPEAN STYLE
Prof. Sa'adah
All democracies share important features (e.g., elections), but they also differ in significant ways (e.g., size and power, constitutional arrangements, party systems, policy patterns, beliefs and expectations about politics). Many of the patterns typical of European democracies are unfamiliar to Americans. Why do British prime ministers get to pick the date--even the year--for general elections? Why do the French seem so intent on regulating the sartorial expression of minority Muslim views? How has Germany dealt with its multiple non-democratic pasts? In this course, we will explore how the major European countries--the United Kingdom, France, and (to a lesser extent) Germany--"do" democracy. How did they become democratic? How does parliamentary government work? How do politics and markets mix? How do citizens participate in the political process? What issues do European elites and electorates view as central and what sorts of policy options have been proposed in response?
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
There are no formal prerequisites for Government 40. The more you bring to the course (e.g., Government 3, 4, 5, and/or 6; relevant courses in history or economics; courses in European literatures; language skills), the more you will get out of it. This is true of any course. If, however, you choose Government 40 as your "point of entry" into the study of comparative politics, European politics, democratic politics, or political development, I hope you will feel welcome: interest and a willingness to think and work hard are the only real prerequisites.
Government 40 will meet in the 11 slot (including, on occasion, the x-hour: Tuesday, 12:00-12:50). Lectures, perhaps an occasional movie, and discussion will complement (but not repeat) the readings. Written requirements will include three essays (7-9 pages each; please see syllabus for due dates). Each assignment will count for approximately one-third of a student's final grade, with grade adjustments to reward improvement and constructive participation. There will be no individual extensions on the due dates for the papers. Students are expected to attend all classes; failure to do so may adversely affect your final grade.
Class announcements, study questions, additional assigned and optional readings, and handouts will be posted on the course's Blackboard site. You should treat all posted material as required reading unless it is clearly marked otherwise.

Gov 40--W 14--Democracy, European Style--Prof. Sa'adah

2

All students are reminded of their obligation to conduct themselves in accordance with the Standards of Conduct in general and with the Academic Honor Principle in particular. Any student who fails to complete any of the written assignments on time or who violates the Honor Principle should expect to fail the course.
If you have any special circumstances relevant to your academic performance, please come see me during the first week of the term.
My office is in Silsby 217. I can always be reached by email. Please check the Blackboard site for up-to-date information about office hours.

COURSE OUTLINE
(Arabic numerals indicate class meetings; please refer to the attached calendar for class dates. This schedule is subject to adjustment...)

INTRODUCTION 1. Liberalism and Democracy: An Ongoing Experiment
I. POLITICS: THE ORGANIZATION OF POWER AND COMPETITION
A. Competition and Representation 2. Parliamentary Systems 3. Patterns of Cleavage; Elections and Electoral Laws 4. Parties and Party Systems 5, 6. Success Stories: The UK, the Federal Republic 7. Horror Stories: Weimar Germany 8, 9. Complicated Stories: France (all regimes), Italy, post-Unification
Germany
B. Power and Implementation 10. The Problem of Sovereignty: Organizing State Power 11. Debates about Decentralization, Devolution, and Federalism Prosecuting Politics: The Political Role(s) of the Judiciary
C. The International Context 12. Cold War and Real Peace The US, International Institutions, and Postwar Recovery 13, 14. Europe in/and the World The Retreat from Empire Debates about European Integration Debates about Intervention Abroad (the 1990-91 Gulf War, Yugoslavia,
Iraq, Libya, Syria...) 15. Discussion

Gov 40--W 14--Democracy, European Style--Prof. Sa'adah

3

II. POLITICS AND MARKETS: THE CHALLENGE OF EQUALITY
A. Postwar Reconstruction 16. Prewar Legacies War as an Agent of Change
B. Postwar Prosperity 17. Varieties of Capitalism: The British Welfare State 18. Varieties of Capitalism: State Capitalism in France 19. Varieties of Capitalism: Germany's Social Market Economy 20. Discussion
C. The Crisis that Came and Stayed 21. The Social and Political Significance of Longterm Unemployment 22. Immigration 23. The Rehabilitation of Inequality 24. Discussion
III. POLITICS, SOCIETY, AND CULTURE: DEMOCRACY IN A CHANGING WORLD
A. The End of "Christian Europe" 25. Changing Patterns of Religious Identification and Practice French Exceptionalism: The Headscarf Debate
B. Protest Movements and Populism 26. Protest Traditions and Populism, Left and Right
(27) Discussion
CORE READING ASSIGNMENTS
Five books, all available for purchase and assigned in their entirety, make up the core readings for the class:
Philip Norton, The British Polity, 5th edition (please do not use a previous edition)
Anne Sa'adah, Contemporary France: A Democratic Education
Barry Eichengreen, The European Economy since 1945: Coordinated Capitalism and Beyond
John R. Bowen, Why the French Don't Like Headscarves: Islam, the State, and Public Space

Gov 40--W 14--Democracy, European Style--Prof. Sa'adah

4

David Marsh, Europe's Deadlock
Additional required readings will be posted on Blackboard.
Please make a habit out of reading on a regular basis the online edition of at least one major European newspaper or periodical (e.g., The Guardian, The Economist, Libération, Le Monde, Die Zeit, the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Der Spiegel).
The Norton and Sa'adah books, supplemented by the Blackboard readings, support the topics we will be discussing in Part I of the course and are also the basis for what we do later. The faster you read these assignments, the more you will get out of class; absolute deadlines are indicated on the attached calendar. The first essay, due at the beginning of class on Feb. 5, will require you to draw on the assigned reading as well as on material covered in class. Eichengreen and Marsh support the material covered in Part II and will be important for the second essay assignment (due at the beginning of class on Feb. 24); Bowen is the core assignment for Part III, and you will have an opportunity to engage with his arguments in the final written assignment (due on March 10).
Blackboard assignments will be announced in class. Sometimes these assignments will respond to questions raised or comments made in class; sometimes they will introduce students to topics and debates we will not have time to cover in a single term. The first such assignment, three readings on contemporary Italy, should be read by the end of the first week of classes (Jan. 10). I guarantee that you will not be bored! If the UK, France, and Germany can be viewed as apples and oranges, Italy--for reasons these articles will help you understand--is more like a potato. More on this in class!
Jones Media Center has streamed several films for us. I will discuss these "assignments" as they become relevant.
Welcome to European politics!

Gov 40--W 14--Democracy, European Style--Prof. Sa'adah

5

Gov 40--Democracy, European Style--Winter 2014

MONDAY 6 Jan
CLASSES BEGIN 1
13

TUESDAY 7
14

WEDNESDAY 8
2
15

THURSDAY 9
16

FRIDAY 10
3
17

4, Finish Norton

5

6

20 21 22 23 24

MLK Day xhr

7, Finish Sa'adah

8

9

27 28 29 30 31

10 11 12

3 Feb

4

5

6

7

13 14 15, 1st Essay Due

Carnival-xhr

10 11 12 13 14

16

17, Finish Eichengreen

18

17 18 19 20 21

19, Finish Marsh

20

21

24 25 26 27 28

22; 2nd Essay Due

Final day to withdraw

23

24

3 March

4

5

6

7

25, Finish Bowen

26

27 LAST CLASS

10
Finals begin; 3rd Essay Due

11

12 13 14 Finals end

