Gov.84.05:  Ethnicity,  Elections  and  Representation     
Fall  Quarter  2012  
   10A,  Tuesday  and  Thursday,  10am  
   Professor  Simon  Chauchard  
Silsby  Hall  202     
simon.chauchard@dartmouth.edu  
   Office  hours:  Wednesdays  9:30-12:00  
        
Topic  &  Description   South  Africa,  The  United-Kingdom,  India,  Brazil,  the  United  States,  Zambia:  most   representative  democracies  also  happen  to  be  multiethnic  democracies.  This   seminar  examines  the  role  played  by  ethnicity  and  ethnic  diversity  in  political   campaigns,  electoral  choices  as  well  as  in  the  subsequent  political  decision-making   process.  Each  class  addresses  a  specific  question.  While  we  will  usually  focus  on  one   "great  book"  per  session  -  taking  time  to  analyze  and  critique  the  author's  thought  in   depth  -,  the  geographical  focus  of  our  readings  will  change  from  one  week  to  the   next,  thus  offering  a  broad  range  of  perspectives  on  the  role  played  by  ethnicity  in   representative  democracies  throughout  the  world.        Objective   The   course   is   an   advanced   seminar   whose   objective   is   not   to   exhaustively   cover   an   entire   knowledge   area,   but   rather   to   expose   students   to   important   social   science   works  and  debates  about  the  role  of  ethnicity  in  elections  and  in  the  representative   process.   As   such,   it   constitutes   an   introduction   to   important   (and   often   recent)   bibliographic  references  in  this  area  of  research.        Requirements   Participation  to  discussion  about  the  readings  30%   Written  Responses  to  readings  (5)  15%   Presentation  on  assigned  readings  (1)  15%   Outline  of  final  research  paper  15%   Presentation  on  research  paper  (1)  10%   Final  paper  15%        

Participation   While  I  will  provide  some  notes,  discussions  of  the  readings  will  occupy  most  of  our   time.  Students  are  expected  to  do  the  assigned  readings  before  class  and  to  actively   participate  in  class  discussions  (Along  with  the  final  exam,  participation  is  the  single   most  important  component  of  your  grade).     How  do  I  assess  who  is  a  good  participant?       
-Good  participation  does  not  necessarily  mean  having  understood  every   aspect  of  the  assigned  material  first  time  through.  The  best  participation   often  comes  in  the  form  of  questions  about  concepts,  arguments,  or  factual   claims  from  the  readings  that  warrant  further  explanation.     -Good  participation  is  constant  and  informed  though.  Participating  a  few   times  in  the  term  will  not  ensure  that  you  get  the  best  possible  participation   grade.  Good  participation  also  requires  that  you  are  well  acquainted  with  the   reading  prior  to  class,  even  if  you  have  not  understood  everything.   Participation  about  the  readings  is  valued,  and  not  merely  your  ability  to   speak  in  front  of  others.     -Although  this  may  be  obvious  to  some,  presence  in  class  plays  a  role  in   determining  what  your  grade  will  be.  I  do  not  monitor  presence,  but  if  I   rarely  see  you  in  class  there  is  a  major  chance  that  you  will  get  a  lower   participation  grade.     -Finally,  your  attitude  in  class  -  even  while  you  do  not  participate  ­  plays  a   role.  I  simply  ask  that  you  be  focused  on  the  discussion  taking  place  in  class   even  when  you  do  not  actively  speak.  Napping  is  excellent,  but  napping  in   class  does  not  count  as  presence,  let  even  participation.  Please  also  see  my   point  about  laptops  below.        Responses  to  readings   Each  student  is  responsible  for  producing  a  written  response  to  the  assigned   readings  for  class  six  times  over  the  course  of  the  semester.  The  purpose  is  to  force   you  to  take  the  next  step  beyond  just  getting  the  reading  done  ­  to  articulate  some   thoughts  about  the  readings  before  class  begins  which,  in  turn,  will  raise  the  overall   quality  of  class  discussion.      You  are  required  to  write  responses  frequently,  but  you  should  not  regard  them  as   high-pressure  assignments.  They  are  not  book  reports,  and  should  not  attempt  to   summarize  the  reading  (which  you  wouldn't  have  space  to  do  in  any  case),  nor  do   they  need  to  be  comprehensive.  You  can  focus  on  a  part  of  the  readings  assigned  for   that  day  if  you  think  it  warrants  particular  attention  ­  e.g.  some  particular  part  of  a   book.  That  said,  I  do  not  recommend  focusing  on  the  particular  in  an  attempt  to   disguise  the  fact  that  you  did  not  do  all  the  reading.      A  written  response  may  take  the  form  of  a  short  critique  of  some  aspect  of  the   assigned  reading  for  a  given  class  if  you  choose.  Alternatively,  it  may  take  the  form   of  identifying:     

·  questions  raised  by  the  readings  that  you  think  warrant  discussion  or   further  clarification;   ·  claims  advanced  by  the  readings  with  which  you  disagree,  or  toward  which   you  are  skeptical;   ·  points  of  agreement  or  disagreement  across  more  than  one  of  the  readings   assigned  for  that  day,  or  across  readings  for  that  day  and  those  earlier  on  the   syllabus;   ·  other  themes,  as  you  see  fit.      In  short,  your  written  response  does  not  need  to  be  a  polished  essay.  A  bulleted  list   is  fine.  It  must  be  coherent,  but  otherwise,  form  and  content  are  up  to  you.  Two   pages  max  (with  reasonable  font,  margins,  etc.).  More  important,  your  response   should  demonstrate  that  you  have  done  the  assigned  reading  for  the  class  and   formulated  some  thoughtful  reaction  to  it.  Having  done  so,  it  should  naturally  follow   that  you  will  be  in  a  position  to  contribute  (perhaps  even  more  constructively  than   on  `non-response  days)  to  class  discussions.  You  must  submit  six  written  responses   during  the  term.        Look  at  the  syllabus  and  decide  which  readings  interest  you.  Look  at  your  calendar   and  decide  on  the  basis  of  your  schedule  and  other  commitments.  But  note:      ·  you  cannot  produce  a  response  paper  on  the  day  of  your  in-class   presentation  on  assigned  readings  (see  below);  and   ·  you  cannot  produce  a  response  paper  during  the  last  two  days  of  class,   when  there  are  no  assigned  readings.      Responses  must  be  submitted  by  email  three  hours  before  class  begins  (i.e  at  1PM).  At   the  top  of  each  response,  in  addition  to  your  name,  you  should  indicate  the  date  of   the  class  and  provide  the  citation  information  for  the  readings  discussed.        Responses  to  readings  will  not  be  graded  individually.  I  will  collect  the  responses   you  produce  over  the  course  of  the  quarter  and  evaluate  them  as  a  group.  Students   who  want  feedback  on  grades  earlier  in  the  semester  may  request  a  preliminary   response  grade  once  three  responses  have  been  submitted,  so  you  can  get  an  idea   where  you  stand.      Presentations   Each  student  will  make  two  presentations  during  the  course  of  the  term  ­  one  on  the   assigned  readings  for  a  given  class  and  the  other  on  the  research  paper.   Presentations  on  the  assigned  readings  will  start  the  second  week  of  class.  I  will   circulate  a  sign-up  sheet  on  the  second  day  of  class  so  you  can  select  a  date  for  your   presentation.        The  last  two  classes  will  be  devoted  to  presentations  of  students'  final  paper   projects  (10-15  minutes  to  present,  followed  by  5-10  minutes  of  Q&A).  At  this  point,   the  papers  will  not  be  written,  but  prospecti  will  have  been  turned  in  and  returned  

with  comments,  and  students  should  be  advancing  on  their  research.  The   presentations  are  an  opportunity  to  present  research-in-progress  and  receive   feedback  from  classmates.        For  paper  guidelines,  see  the  memo  on  the  Materials  page  of  the  class  BB  site.  Make   sure  to  meet  with  me  after  class  early  enough  to  bounce  ideas.        Final  paper  (4500  words  maximum,  including  abstract,  references,  tables  &  figures)   Each  student  will  write  a  paper  on  a  topic  of  her/his  own  design  (with  feedback   from  me)  on  ethnicity  in  politics.  You  are  not  limited  to  the  topics  specifically   covered  by  the  readings,  although  the  assigned  readings  might  help  you  frame  your   research  and/or  formulate  ideas.  We  will  discuss  the  task  of  identifying  a  research   topic,  and  devote  some  class  time  to  it,  during  the  second  day  of  class.  I  recommend   that  you  look  ahead  on  the  syllabus  for  ideas  about  potential  final  paper  topics   because  you  will  have  to  identify  a  topic,  and  begin  work  on  your  paper,  before  we   cover  all  of  the  material  in  class.  You  should  start  to  consider  what  topic  you  intend   to  write  about  right  away,  and  bounce  ideas  off  me  early  and  often.  You  are  required   to  turn  in  a  prospectus  for  your  paper  by  October  8  (Note:  there  is  no  class  on  Oct  4   so  that  you  can  focus  on  this).  For  more  details  on  the  final  paper,  see  Research   Paper  Guidelines  on  the  Assignments  page  of  the  class  BB  site.      Getting  the  readings   Everything  will  be  made  available  in  electronic  format  on  the  Assigned  Readings   page,  under  Documents  on  the  course  Blackboard  site.      Missing  Classes     I  do  not  explicitly  take  attendance  in  this  class.  Hence  I  do  not  require  you  to  email   me  if  you  are  going  to  miss  a  class.  This  being  said,  a  large  share  of  your  grade  is   participation  (30%).  So  missing  too  many  classes  is  not  encouraged.        Religious  observation   Some  students  may  wish  to  take  part  in  religious  observances  that  occur  during  this   academic  term.  If  you  have  a  religious  observance  that  conflicts  with  your   participation  in  the  course,  please  meet  with  me  before  the  end  of  the  second  week   of  the  term  to  discuss  appropriate  accommodations.        Turning  off  devices   I  ask  that  for  three  and  a  half  hours  a  week  we  all  refrain  from  staring  at  our  various   screens  and  that  we  delay  gratification  related  to  exciting  status  updates  or  other   news.  Print  your  discussion  notes  if  need  be.  Unless  you  have  specific  needs,  no   laptops  in  class  please.             

Schedule  of  Classes        September  11      Introduction      September  13      1.  Lecture  on  Ethnicity.     2.  In-class  exercise  about  defining  a  research  question    
Chandra,  Kanchan.  2006.  "What  is  Ethnic  Identity  and  Does  it  Matter?"   Forthcoming  in  the  Annual  Review  of  Political  Science.  Read  pp.  1-29.  (article   available  on  BB)      September  18:  Ethnic  appeals      Tali  Mendelberg  The  Race  Card:  Campaign  Strategy,  Implicit  Messages,  and  the  Norm   of  Equality  (2001)  ­  Selections         September  20:  Ethnic  Cleavages        Dan  Posner  Institution  and  Ethnic  Politics  in  Africa  (2005).  Selections.           September  25:  NO  CLASS         September  27:  Ethnic  voting  I      Kanchan  Chandra  Why  ethnic  parties  succeed.  Patronage  and  Ethnic  Headcount  in   India  (2004),  Selections.           October  2:  Ethnic  voting  II        Karen  Ferree  Framing  the  Race  in  South  Africa  (2010)  .  Cambridge  University  Press   (2010)         October  4:  NO  CLASS  ­  Meet  with  me  that  week.           October  9:  Does  the  Ethnicity  of  Representatives  impact  the  Policies  they   implement?    

   Besley,  Tim,  Rohini  Pande  and  Vijayendra  Rao  (2004).  "The  Politics  of  Public  Good   Provision:  Evidence  from  Indian  Local  Governments,"  Journal  of  the  European   Economics  Association  Papers  and  Proceedings,  Vol.  2  (2-3):  416-426.  
   Pande,  Rohini  (2003).  "Can  Mandated  Political  Representation  Provide   Disadvantaged  Minorities  Policy  Influence?  Theory  and  Evidence  from  India,"   American  Economic  Review,  93.      Preuhs,  Robert  R.  2006.  The  Conditional  Effects  of  Minority  Descriptive   Representation:  Black  Legislators  and  Policy  Influence  in  the  American  States."   Journal  of  Politics  68:  585-599.      October  11:  Do  Ethnicity  and  Patronage  go  together?        Fearon,  James  D.  1999.  "Why  Ethnic  Politics  and  `Pork'  Tend  to  Go  Together."   Manuscript,  Department  of  Political  Science,  Stanford  University.  
   Kasara,  Kimuli  (2007)  "Tax  Me  if  You  Can:  Ethnic  Geography,  Democracy,  and  the   Taxation  of  Agriculture  in  Africa"  American  Political  Science  Review,  vol.101,  no.1,   pp.159-172.      October  16:  Psychological  Effects  of  African-American  Representation      Gay,  Claudine  (2002).  "Spirals  of  Trust:  The  Effect  of  Descriptive  Representation  on  
the  Relationship  between  Citizens  and  their  Government,"  American  Journal  of   Political  Science  46.      Hajnal,  Zoltan  (2001).  "White  Residents,  Black  Incumbents,  and  a  Declining  Racial   Divide".  American  Political  Science  Review.  95(3):603-617.      Valentino,  Nicholas  &  Ted  Brader  (2010).  "The  Sword's  Other  Edge:  Perceptions  of   Discrimination  and  Racial  Policy  Opinion  after  Obama".  Presentation,  APSA  2010      October  18:  Questioning  Voters'  Attitudes  Towards  Obama      Tesler,  Michael  and  David  O.  Sears.  2010.  Obama's  Race:  The  2008  Election  and  the   Dream  of  a  Post-Racial  America.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press.  Introduction   and  Chapter  8.        Jackman,  Simon  and  Lynn  Vavreck  (2011)  How  Does  Obama  Match-Up?   Counterfactuals  &  the  Role  of  Obama's  Race  in  2008              

October  23:  "Minority  inclusion"  and  intergroup  relations  in  comparative   perspective      Fearon  James,  David  Laitin  and  Kimuli  Kasara  (2007).  "Ethnic  Minority  Rule  and   Civil  War  Onset".  American  Political  Science  Review  101,  1.      Steven  Wilkinson  Votes  and  Violence.  Electoral  Competition  and  Ethnic  Riots  in  India   (2005)  .  Selections.        October  25:  Minority  inclusion  and  intergroup  relations  in  comparative   perspective      Rafaela  Dancygier  Immigration  and  Ethnic  Conflict  in  Europe  (2010).  Selections.        Chauchard,  Simon  (2011).  "Can  the Experience of Political Power by a Member of a
Stigmatized Group Change the Nature of Day-to-day Interpersonal Relations? Evidence
from Rural India". Manuscript.    October  30:  Ethnic  diversity  and  Public  Goods  provision  I      Lieberman,  Ethan  (2009).  Boundaries  of  Contagion.  How  Ethnic  Politcs  have  shaped   Government  Responses  to  AIDS.  Princeton.  Selections      Alesina,  Alberto,  and  Reza  Baqir  and  William  Easterly.  (1999).  "Public  Goods  and   Ethnic   Divisions."  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  114(4),  1243-1284.      November  1:  Ethnic  diversity  and  Public  Goods  provision  II      Miguel,  Edward  and  Mary  Kay  Gugerty.  2005.  "Ethnic  Divisions,  Social   Sanctions,  and  Public  Goods  in  Kenya."  Journal  of  Public  Economics  89  (11- 12):2325-2368.      Edward  Miguel.  2004.  "Tribe  or  Nation?  National  Building  and  Public  Goods  in   Kenya  versus  Tanzania."  World  Politics  56:  327-62.      Habyarimana  et  al  (2007).  "Why  Does  Ethnic  Diversity  Undermine  Public  Goods   Provision?".  APSR.        November  6  :  The  effect  of  Political  Competition  on  Ethnicity  
   Dunning,  Thad  (2009).  "The  Salience  of  Ethnic  Categories:  Field  and  Natural  
Experimental  Evidence  from  Indian  Village  Council",  working  paper,  Department   of  Political  Science,  Yale  U.       

Eifert,  Benn  &  Edward  Miguel  &  Daniel  Posner  (2010)  "Political  Competition  and   Ethnic  Identification  in  Africa."  American  Journal  of  Political  Science  54,  2:  494- 510    
   Posner  Daniel  N.  (2004).  "The  Political  Salience  of  Cultural  Difference:    Why  Chewas   and  Tumbukas  are  Allies  in  Zambia  and  Adversaries  in  Malawi,"  American   Political  Science  Review  98,  4  (November).      November  8     Students  Presentations      November  13   Students  Presentations          

