Music 022: Harmony and Rhythm 14W: 10 
(PAGE 1/5)

This course focuses on musical literature of the eighteenth, nineteenth (and some of the twentieth)  centuries, and examines the harmonic principles and implications of counterpoint and orchestration. Course  work includes score analysis of a variety of musical genres, readings from theoretical treatises, written  critiques of musical compositions, directed composition exercises, and inclass performances of musical  works.

Prereq.: Music 20, a combined score of 5 on the Music AP Examination, or the successful completion of  the Music Placement Examination. Lab. XHour: Duff. Dist: ART

Learning Outcomes: At the end of this course you will be obtain:
1. The ability to perform harmonic analysis on music from the 17th Century to the Present.  2. Proficiency in the identification and sequencing of  tonal harmonic progressions for  composition, arranging, and pedagogy.  3. A historical context for functional and nonfunctional harmony extant today.

Textbook(s)

    

The required textbook for reference in Dartmouth's theory sequence is Stefan Kostka & Dorothy Payne, Tonal 

Harmony (6th ed.). Additional readings will be taken from source materials, and will be posted to the course's Canvas 

system. You should also bring ample music paper and pencils as well as writing paper for taking notes. (See either the 

course Blackboard website or http://www.musicsheaf.com/ for free music paper.) Reserve materials related to this 

course can be found in Paddock Library under Music 22 reserve. N.B.: Assignments will be completed mostly by 

hand, but I will allow use of Finale or Sibelius (Sibelius is best as Dartmouth has an institutional license) for 

final assignment work 

On Reserve: Mathieu, Harmonic Experience, 1st edition. Assessment A significant portion of Music 2023 is devoted to building fundamental musicianship skills. The ability to  recognize, identify, notate, replicate, and evaluate what you experience aurally is critical as you grow as a  musician.

To develop these skills you will be required to do two things regularly:

1. Attend and actively participate in the weekly musicianship lab (xhour, Thursday 12:0012:50p.m. in  Faulkner)

2. Devote one hour of practice a week to aural drilling using Practica Musica. All music majors and all  students enrolled in Music Theory courses have access to this software. Each time you log in, data  pertaining to your session will be logged into your student file. Students devoting 1.5 hours per week to aural  drilling using Practica Musica will automatically raise their musicianship score by 15%.

Faculty will review both the time you are spending and the progress you are making using Practica Musica  and may recommend ways to improve your performance.

All music majors and all students enrolled in Music Theory courses have access to this software through a  site license. Each time you log in, data pertaining to your session will be logged into your student file.  Faculty will review both the time you are spending and the progress you are making using Practica Musica  and may recommend ways to improve your performance.

Music 022: Harmony and Rhythm 14W: 10 
(PAGE 2/5)
Your work and progress both within the lab and from using Practica Musica will constitute 25% of your grade  in Music 2023. The remainder of your grade will be determined by your performance on the various  assignments and on your attendance and participation.

Assessment Breakdown

Final Piece + Paper Project Musicianship Lab Weekly Assignments (composition & analysis) MidTerm Evaluation Participation in class, weekly reading/listening discussions

30% 25% 20% 15% 10% 

Attendance
As mentioned above, 10% of your grade will comprise attendance and participation. Please note: more  than three absences from class or one absence from a design critique day, (see below,) will result in a zero!  Since this class involves performance practice, it is vitally important that you are present and engaged with  the tasks and materials.

Laptop Policy
There will be both appropriate and inappropriate times when you should be using your laptop. Certain  sections of lectures and discussions may require all or some laptops to be closed, i.e. not in use.

Statement on Physically and Learning Disabled Students
Students with disabilities enrolled in this course who may need disabilityrelated classroom  accommodations are encouraged to make an appointment to see me before the second week of the term.  All discussions will remain confidential, although the Student Accessibility Services office may be consulted  to discuss appropriate implementation of an accommodation requested.

Student Religious Observances
Some students may wish to take part in religious observances that occur during this academic term. If you  have a religious observance that conflicts with your participation in the course, please meet with me before  the end of the second week of the term to discuss appropriate accommodations.

Office Hours
Office hours are one hour prior to each class unless otherwise noted, according to student's schedules. I  strongly recommend setting an appointment on Google calendar, (link on Blackboard and in email,) in  advance, because I may or may not be in my office otherwise. This method guarantees that we will see  each other. My office is on the first floor of Hallgarten Hall. Hallgarten is between New Hampshire and Topliff  dorms. Please ring the doorbell when as it remains locked at all times.

Honor Principle
It is generally assumed that you adhere to Dartmouth College's Academic Honor policy outlined in the ORC.  This means that you must acknowledge sourcesin any formatwhether it be audio samples, written text,  etc. Furthermore, given the collaborative nature of an ensemble, you may be asked at the end of the course  to provide a statement of contribution to the final collaborative project, which may impact your final grade.  Failure to accurately report your sources and contributions may result in serious academic action by the  Associate Dean of Students.

Music 022: Harmony and Rhythm 14W: 10 
(PAGE 3/5)

week 1.  01/06

Exercises/Listening

Readings/Assignments

Course introduction, review of basic harmonic  principles, including progression, sequences,  harmonic cells, and voice leading
A brief historical narrative of tonality, and the  resulting `crisis' of Western Music. 
    Introduction to ReductionBased Analysis Brief overview of philosophy and constructs

J.S. Bach Complete Chorales 
R. Wagner, Tristan und Isolde,  Liebestod. 
A. Schoenberg, Six Short Pieces  for Piano, Five Pieces for  Orchestra

Reading:Kostka and  Payne: Tonal  Harmony, 6th edition,  Chapter 2728. 
Chapter 14  leadingtone sevenths

week 2 .   01/13  Neopolitan Sixth Chords part I    Neopolitan Sixth Chords part II
Secondary Functions 

Schubert String Quartet in  Dminor, D. 810, no. 1
   
Beethoven Symphony No. 1, Introduction
Schubert String Quartet in  Dminor, D. 810, no. 1

Reading: Kostka and  Payne: Tonal  Harmony, 6th edition,  Ch. 21
Kostka and Payne:  Tonal Harmony, 6th  edition,  Ch. 22
    Kostka and Payne:  Tonal Harmony, 6th  edition,  Ch. 1617

week 3.   01/21
    Introduction to Modulation 
    Harmonic Implications of Single Melodies
(monophonic tonal references and modulations)

  Bach Gigue from Partita no. 2  for Solo Violin
   
Chant: Missa Pange Lingua

QUIZ #1: FRI Basic Harmonic  Review, Neapolitan  Sixths, Secondary  Functions
Kostka and Payne:  Tonal Harmony, 6th  edition,  Ch. 1819

Music 022: Harmony and Rhythm 14W: 10 
(PAGE 4/5)

week 4.   01/27

Exercises/Listening

Readings/Assignments

    Renaissance Polyphony and the Emergence of  Harmonic Progression 
Tonicization     Modal Alterations & Mixtures

Polyphonic cantus firmus Mass  setting by Des Prez Missa  Pange Lingua
Monteverdi Cruda Amarilli
Ravel: Alborada del gracioso

 Reading: G.M. Artusi  from "Lartusi, ovvero  Delle imperfezioni della  moderna musica"  (Strunk, p. 393404)
  
Analysis #1 Due:  Mozart Piano Sonata  No. 16 in CMajor, K.  545, first mvt.

week  5.   02/03 Sequential modulation Modulations involving common chords Commontone modulations

Bach Erbarme dich from St.  Matthew Passion
Brahms: Symphony No. 4, 1    
Dvoák String Quartet, Op. 51,  IV
   
Mozart Fantasia, K. 475 Fauré Agnus Dei from Requiem

  Reading: Kostka, p.  319334
     Locate threeworks  from chamber music that use  commonchord  modulation and identify  passages.    Modulatory exercises:  Class drill on  modulating in 4voice  texture applying voice  leading principles

week 6.   02/11
Modulation to Closely Related Keys     MIDTERM EXAMINATION: Structural and  Harmonic Analysis

Brahms Quintet, op. 115
SaintSaëns Carneval des  Animaux, Le Cygne
]

Music 022: Harmony and Rhythm 14W: 10 

 Composition  Assignment 1: Draft a blueprint for a  32bar composition  that reflects  traits and  modulates to a closely  related key using  devices presented  through Week 5. 
MIDTERM  EXAMINATION: FRI:  Structural and  Harmonic Analysis

(PAGE 5/5)
week 7.  02/17
No Class Monday  No XHour  Harmonic elisions, expansions and  compressions
week 8.    02/25  Modulation to Distant Keys
    Harmonic Architecture
   Inclass conferences regarding composition

Exercises/Listening

Readings/Assignments

Beethoven Piano Sonata in C#  minor: Op. 27, no. 2, first  movement
   
Bach St. Anne Fugue

Introduction of  Composition Final  Project
Analysis #2 Due:  Write a short essay on  the structure and tonal  centers of your  assigned piece.

Composition Design  Proposals Due FRI

   Bach Bach St. Anne fugue
Mozart Ave Verum Corpus
Haydn Symphony #100  ("Military"), No. 2

 QUIZ #2: MON  Structural Analysis

week 9.   03/03
    PostRomantic Scales and Harmonies
    Extended Tertian Harmony     Polyharmony
week 10.    03/10
FINAL EXAMINATION PERIOD:  Performance of Piece + Papers

Debussy Prelude a L' après midi d' une faune
   
Milhaud Four Sketches for  Piano

Reading:Kostka and 
Payne: Tonal  Harmony, 6th edition, 
Chapter 29 + Ch. 2728 
(revisited)    
Compositions due  on  03/07 at 5p.m.

