 
   
 
         
                   
                  What is this course  about?   You can learn new information, like a language, while asleep. A handshake can tell you  something about a person's personality.  You only use 10% of your brain.  Opposites  attract.1  People believe in all kinds of things about human behavior without ever  questioning why they believe in such things. This course is intended to examine some common
myths in psychology and in the world around you and give you some of the tool to answer the
question, "Why do people believe in weird things?" 
What are the learning objectives for this class?  By the end of the class, I hope students will be able to: 
 Establish your personal criteria for belief in new, traditional, and unusual ideas. 
1 One of these statements is actually considered true.  Can you guess which one? 
 

 

 Think critically about ideas inside and outside of the field of psychology and 

never take for granted that something someone says is true unless you are 

provided with evidence. 

 Discuss their skepticism about an idea or belief with respect and intelligence to 

those who might hold such ideas or beliefs in high regard. 

 

What will we be reading?   

 Harrison, G. (2012).  50 Popular Beliefs that People Think are True.  Prometheus. 

 Lilienfeld, S.C., Lynn, S.J., Ruscio, Beyerstein, B.L.  (2010). 50 Great myths of 

popular psychology.  WileyBlackwell. 

 Tavris, C. (2011).  Psychobabble and Biobunk (3rd ed.).  Pearson.   

 

How do I contact the instructor? 

 

I always have office hours (347 

Moore Hall) M: 23pm, W:  24pm 

Th: 

10noon, 45pm, but I'll do my best 

to 

accommodate your schedule and meet you anytime the both of us are free.  The best part 

of this course for me is talking to students, but I can be a little hard to reach at times.  I 

wear many hats on campus and at home and the occasional emergency will crop up that 

will need my attention. 

 

How can I get to know the professor and my classmates a little better? 

 

Half the fun of a FirstYear seminar is talking about it beyond the four walls of the 

classroom.  So, I routinely carry on the conversation from class whenever I bump into a 

student in a dining hall or along the sidewalk. 

 

I routinely have lunch on campus on Wednesdays and I would love it if you would join 

me.  If you prefer '53 Commons, or the Hop, or even a cheap bowl of soup at Umpleby's 

downtown, let's make it a point of occasionally having an informal meal together and get 

to know each other outside of the classroom. 

 

What will the class be like from daytoday? 

 

Participants will be required to complete the assigned readings for each day of class. 

Each student should be prepared to lead a "minidiscussion" by preparing questions 

or observations before the class meeting. Classes will be supplemented by additional 

readings (as they are both appropriate and available), films, and other activities.  Because 

this format depends upon participation, absences will not be allowed without excuse.  If 

you miss more than two classes, I reserve the right to withhold your entire participation 

grade. 

 

In the last weeks of the course, you will be able to host a discussion and presentation on 

the results of your research into a pseudoscientific claim or psychological myth.  You can 

 

 
get help from me or from the RWIT on the preparation of your presentation, but don't be  afraid to ask the class to read or reread something for class or supplement your  presentation with a video or demonstration.   
A DECLARATION   
It should be stated at this point that there is a world of difference between being a skeptic,  being a cynic, and even, being a jerk.  This course is an attempt to foster a healthy  attitude when evaluating the veracity of the many claims you will encounter regarding  human behavior.  You should find this course an oasis for your opinions and beliefs.  I  hope you will always feel comfortable expressing your opinion and tolerant during  discourse with others.  As you will hear me say many times, "I don't care whether you  believe in UFO's or not I just want you to understand why you believe in them."      Will we have to use our xhour? 
  Our xhour (T:  12:0012:50pm) will be used routinely for a classroom activity or some  really weird film.  PLEASE keep xhours on your calendars and attend them with the  same dedication you would dedicate to regular class periods.   
What will I be required to do other than come to class?   
This course will have a series of EIGHT  writing assignments  (anywhere from 1 to 4 pages) of which you will do SIX2, a  "mythbusting" presentation of a topic of your choice and, of course,  class participation.  Each week, we will end the Friday class with a  series of potential writing assignments (discussed in class) and spend  the weekend putting together a document for the following Friday.  Here's how the  editing works for this course:  I will work with any draft of your paper as long as it is  handed in by 4pm on Tuesday.  If you submit a draft version you are eligible to have your  final draft resubmitted for regrading if you are unhappy with the final result.  If you do  not submit a draft by Tuesday, you do not have the option of asking for a regrade.  You  may also access this option by asking for a peer review (more on this later...).  Drafts are  returned by Friday at the latest and the final version is handed in on Wednesday of the  following week.   
AN OBLIGATION   
What can you say about plagiarism and academic dishonesty that you don't  already know?  Copying the words of other researchers or students without appropriate  referencing or claiming someone's work as your own is plagiarism.  Very specific  guidelines exist for the creation of original work and citations of other's work can be seen  at http://www.dartmouth.edu/~sources/.  We will take great pains to talk about this in 
2 I reserve the right to make one of these assignments MANDATORY.  This will likely come up in the middle 
of the term as we explore scientific citations and how to use them. 
 

 

class, but should you have a question and need guidance, I would rather you delay 

handing something in than risk your academic career.  No late penalty is worth a 

suspension. 

How will I be graded? 

 

Your final grade will be based upon four separate elements 

  ESSAYS3...........................60% 

PRESENTATION..................15% 

CLASS CONTRIBUTIONS......15% 

PEER EDITING....................10% 

 

I know, of course, that I can never really relieve you of the burden of worrying about 

grades, but if your work is handed in on time, you try your best with the writing 

exercises, and contributions to in class discussions, you will not only do well in this 

course, but will come to look forward to getting together every week. 

 

What happens if I turn in an assignment late? 

 

First the good news 

you are hereby granted one (1), 

MondayFriday 

extension for any one assignment you 

have due this term 

(REQUST MUST BE SUBMITTED IN 

WRITING).  Use it 

wisely!  Now, the bad news other than 

this one extension, 

any other late submission will result in a 

full letter grade (that 

is, from an A to a B) reduction for every 

24 hours (the 

weekend counts for 1 late day).  No paper 

receiving more than two reductions will be accepted.  The only exception to this policy is 

an officially documented College excuse (health or family emergency).  No, you do not 

need a dean's verification.  Let's just be honest with one another. 

Be your own teaching assistant! 

 

I have always loved the writing portion of this course.  I have seen some terrific ideas put 

forth and the occasional story that I have just had to tell my colleagues about.  But, I am 

always a little disappointed when a student asks me, "Well, what do you want us to 

write?"  To move beyond the "writefortheprofessor" I am asking you to help me with 

some of the rough drafts of your colleagues.  Each week two or three students will be 

selected to receive a pair of papers to read and comment upon.  These papers will be from 

anonymous authors and you will be expected to comment upon, suggest changes, and 

meet with me to talk about the papers in detail.  This meeting will occur sometime 

between Wednesday morning and Friday afternoon.  If you are lucky, we can do over a 

lunch or a breakfast and get to know one another a little better. 

3 You only have to do 6 out of the 8 essays, but if you choose to do more, the grades for the all of the essays 
you do will be averaged together.   

 
    What if I have a documented disability that interferes with my performance in class?    Any student with a documented disability need academic adjustments or accommodations  is invited and encouraged to speak with me by the end of the second week of the term  (January 21).  All discussions will remain confidential, although the Academic Skills  Center will be consulted to verify the documentation of the disability.    Anything else I should know about this course?    I always look forward to teaching this course and it is important to me that you feel like  you are getting something out of the discussions and readings.  I also hope you have a  little fun.  Should at anytime during the term you feel like you would like to take the  course in a  different direction or want to try something a little different, do not hesitate to ask.  I  want to learn as much as you do and a good class dialogue goes in both directions.                   
AN INVITATION   
Come visit my office library from time to time to find something interesting to  read.  You'll find the beginnings of a "skeptic's library" with such titles as, Alien  Contacts & Abductions:  The Real Story, The Faith Healers, and Nibbling on Einstein's  Brain.  It's worth a stop by just to go through the video library alone!    In lieu of a personal visit, have a look at some websites that may get you thinking like a  skeptic: http://skepdic.com/ (home of the Skeptic's Dictionary...an excellent source),  www.skeptic.com (home of the Skeptics Society Web Page), www.junkscience.com (a 
 

  little more about scientific flaws, but neat, nonetheless), and www.quackwatch.com  (medical fraud).  Don't forget the great journal, The Skeptical Inquirer and the  companion site, http://www.csicop.org/si/online.html.  This is a spectacular resource and  I urge you to look at some of the original articles here and think about them as a source  for your writing.  Check out everything from articles on pet psychics  (http://www.csicop.org/si/200211/petpsychic.html) to how NOT to test claims of  communication with the afterlife (http://www.csicop.org/si/200301/medium.html).  A  fairly complete set of original copies are available in my office in Moore Hall.     
 

 

Tentative Schedule   
Week One:  Introductions and getting started 
 

Date  January 6 
January 7 (Xhour)  January 8 
January 10 

What we will be doing  Introducing the course and  discussing expectations on the  part of both the instructor and  student  FILM:  THE SECRET OF  THE PSYCHICS  The wide, wide world of  psychomythology.  Do we only  use 10% of our brains? 
Magical Thinking.  (Assignment #1 goes out.) 

What you should be reading   
 
Lilienfeld, et.al.:  Introduction,  Chapter 1 Higbee, K.L. and Clay,  S.L. (1998).  College students'  beliefs in the tenpercent myth.  Journal of Psychology, 132:  469476.  (BB)4  Harrison, Myths 18. 

    Week Two:  Thinking about how the media portrays myths (both good and bad)   

Date  January 13  January 14 (Xhour)  January 15 
January 17 

What we will be doing 
What is the Mozart effect?  Is  there such a thing as a midlife  crisis? 
PENN AND TELLER'S  "BULLSHIT"  (Rough draft of  Assignment #1 is due by 4pm). 
If you are unsure of your  answer when taking a test, is it  better to stick with your  original hunch?  Will you  REALLY bark like a dog under  hypnosis? 
Science and Reasoning/Strange  Healings  (Assignment #2 goes  out.)   

What you should be reading  Lilienfeld, et.al.:  Chapters 2 & 3.  Tavris (TBA).     
Lilienfeld, et.al.:  Chapters 4 and  5.  Tavris (TBA). 
Harrison, Myths 1627. 

    Week Three:  Some really strange things people think are true   

Date  January 20 

What we will be doing  MLK DAY (No classes held.) 

What you should be reading 
   

4 Occasionally I like to add a reference from a journal or other source to supplement the reading.  I have  placed these readings on CANVAS and designated them with the letters (CAN).  I never mean to overwhelm  you with readings, but you can feel free to tell me to cut back and spare you from reading just for reading's 
sake. 
 

 

January 21 (Xhour)  January 22 
January 24 

FILM:  FACILITATED  COMMUNICATION  (Rough  draft of Assignment #2 is due  by 4pm). 
Do lie detectors detect anything  at all?  Do opposites attract?  (The final draft of Assignment  #1 is collected.)  Can your  handwriting really tell you  anything about a person's  personality?   
Lure of the Gods.  Does religion  belong in these discussions?  (Assignment #3 goes out.) 

 
Lilienfeld, et.al.:  Chapters 6, 7, 8  and 9.  Tavris (TBA).   
Harrison, Myths 2839. 

    Week Four:  Finally, we get to talk about alien abduction!   

Date  January 27 
January 28 (Xhour) 
January 29  January 31 

What we will be doing 
Just how naïve are people  about mental illness?  Is  Lillienfeld being too naïve?  (The final draft of Assignment  #2 is collected.) 
FILM:  ALIEN ABDUCTION  (Rough draft of Assignment #3  is due by 4pm). 
Out there  
So, is there anything in  psychology that is NOT a  myth?  (Assignment #4 goes  out.) 

What you should be reading  Lilienfeld, et.al.:  Chapters 10 and  11.  Tavris (TBA).   
 
Harrison, Myths 1014.  Lilienfeld, et.al.:  Postscript.  Tavris (TBA). 

    Week Five:  Let's do an experiment!   

Date  February 3 
February 4 (Xhour)  February 5  February 7 

What we will be doing 
Can you sense when someone is  staring at you? (The final draft  of Assignment #3 is collected.) 
FILM:  TBA  (Rough draft of  Assignment #4 is due by 4pm). 
Can you sense when someone is  staring at you? 
CARNIVAL HOLIDAY ...NO  CLASSES.  BE SAFE!  (Assignment #5 goes out.) 

What you should be reading  Tavris (TBA).Sheldrake (BB):  Intro, Chapters 8 and 11 
 
Tavris (TBA).Sheldrake (BB):  Intro, Chapters 8 and 11   

    Week Six:  Ghosts, witches and things that go bump in the night...Oh, and the end of the world!   

 

 

Date  February 10 
February 11 (Xhour) 
February 12 
February 14 

What we will be doing 
Bizarre beings.  (The final draft  of Assignment #4 is collected.) 
FILM:  TBA  (Rough draft of  Assignment #5 is due by 4pm). 
Weird places/Dreaming of the  end.   
 Catch up, interesting ideas and  things we did not get to  explore:  (urban legends,  Dartmouth myths, dowsing,  faith healing, homeopathy,  graphology, etc.) (The final  draft of Assignment #5 is  collected.) 

    Week Seven:  Now, the class is yours!   

Date  February 17 
February 18 (Xhour)  February 19  February 21 

What we will be doing 
Catch up, interesting ideas and  things we did not get to  explore:  (urban legends,  Dartmouth myths, dowsing,  faith healing, homeopathy,  graphology, etc.) (The final  draft of Assignment #5 is  collected.) 
FILM:  TBA  (Rough draft of  Assignment #6 is due by 4pm). 
STUDENT MYTHBUSTING  PRESENTATIONS   
STUDENT MYTHBUSTING  PRESENTATIONS  (Assignment #7 goes out.) 

    Week Eight:  A second week of presentations   

Date  February 24 
February 25 (Xhour)  February 26 

What we will be doing 
STUDENT MYTHBUSTING  PRESENTATIONS (The final  draft of Assignment #6 is  collected.) 
FILM:  TBA  (Rough draft of  Assignment #7 is due by 4pm). 
STUDENT MYTHBUSTING  PRESENTATIONS   

What you should be reading  Harrison, Myths 4043.    Harrison, Myths 4450.  TBA 
What you should be reading  TBA 
  TBA (Presenter's choice)    TBA (Presenter's choice)   
What you should be reading  TBA (Presenter's choice)      TBA (Presenter's choice)   

 

 

February 28 

STUDENT MYTHBUSTING  PRESENTATIONS  (Assignment #8 goes out.)5  

TBA (Presenter's choice)   

    Week One:  The last week of classes!   

Date  March 3 
March 4 (Xhour)  March 5  March 7 

What we will be doing 
STUDENT MYTHBUSTING  PRESENTATIONS  (The final  draft of Assignment #7 is  collected.) 
FILM:  TBA  (Rough draft of  Assignment #8 is due by 4pm). 
STUDENT MYTHBUSTING  PRESENTATIONS   
STUDENT MYTHBUSTING  PRESENTATIONS   

What you should be reading  TBA (Presenter's choice)   
 
TBA (Presenter's choice)    TBA (Presenter's choice)   

  THERE IS NO FINAL EXAM FOR THIS COURSE! 
  This course is dedicated to my mother. 

You always taught me that curiosity was a virtue 
And never failed to keep me from asking, "Why?" 

 

5 The final draft of Assignment #8 will be due by 4pm on March 10.   

