INTRODUCTION TO JUDAISM ­Fall 2012
REL 6 / JWST 6 MWF 11:15 - 12:20 [Tu 12:00-12:50]
Professor Benor
Office Hours: Tuesday 1-3 & by appointment (304 Thornton)
The course offers an introduction to Judaism by examining three spiritual manifestations that were dominant from Late Antiquity through Early Modernity: (1) Torah Study and Ritualization; (2) Philosophical­Political Theology; and (3) Mystical Practices and Kabbalist Theosophy. Against this background we shall consider the impact of modern challenges to the tradition and outline several modes of adaptation.
Requirements Exegetical Essay (2 pages) [Due TBD / by 5 PM] 30% Analytical Essay (3 pages) [Due TBD / by 5PM] 30% Final exam ­ "take-home" [Due 11. 20 / by noon] 40%
Required Texts (available at Wheelock Books): Scheindlin. A Short History of the Jewish People Halbertal. People of the Book Seeskin. Maimonides Green, Arthur. A Guide to the Zohar
Additional readings will be posted on Blackboard
Policies Whenever possible, audio recordings of lectures will be made available on blackboard. Lectures are recorded to ease the pressure on note-taking in class, to allow students to think, participate in discussions, ask questions, and study for the final exam.
In-class thinking and discussion are the most important part of the course. It is through them that we learn how to think about religion, in general, and gain deeper understanding of Judaism. Questioning and discussion, anytime, are your responsibility. X-hours will be used only when needed to keep us on schedule.
The burden of reading and writing has been minimized, as much as possible, to allow students the leisure to reflect about the issues that come up in class and in the readings. Reflection is a major part of the class work-load and it is completely up to you. Study questions will be provided as needed and upon request.
The "take-home" open-books nature of the assignments makes information readily available. This allows the assignment to focus on students' understanding of the significance of the information and their learning what questions to ask about it.
Students with special needs that will not be resolved by access to recorded lectures must discuss their needs with the instructor by the end of the 2nd week of classes.
Instructor and students are bound by the honor code.

Schedule of Class Meetings and Readings

1 Introduction to the Course

9. 10 M

Cosmos & Polis --" Religion" & Judaism

9. 12
9. 14 9. 17 9. 18
9. 19
9. 21 9. 24

2 Historical Geopolitical Observations

W Antiquity--the Fertile Crescent

Scheindlin. 1-69

F

Medieval & Modern--between Christendom

and Islam

Scheindlin. 71-260

* No class--Jewish New Year

* No class--Jewish New Year
3 Jewish Cosmopolis

W Election · "The Chosen People"
F Monotheism--God of Creation
Cosmological Ritual--Cosmos & Chaos M ·Solomon's Temple
·Right and wrong animals

Levenson: "Chosenness and its Enemies" Strauss. "Interpretation of Genesis" Midrash Rabbah, "Adam has been created"
Douglas."The Abominations of Leviticus" Levenson. "The Mastery of God and the
Vulnerability of Order"

9. 25 T

Class

9. 26 9. 28 10. 1 10. 3
10. 5
10. 8 

* No class--Jewish Day of Atonement

Cosmological Change

F ·Torah of Creation · Linguistic Cosmology

· God's Calendar

4 Divine Power and Human Autonomy

M

· From Adam to Job · It is not in heaven! · "Will the Judge of the whole earth not do

justice?"

Moral Psychology

W · Good Impulse · Evil Impulse

5 The Kingdom of God

Dan. "The Language of Creation and its Grammar"
Elior. "From Temple to Merkava"
Genesis 18:16-33; Benor. "Abraham, God, and Justice" &
"From Adam to Job" Boyarin. "Dialectics of Desire: `The Evil
Instinct Is Very Good'" Benor."Rabbinic moral psychology".

F God's Presence in the World--Shekhina

Urbach. "The Shekhina--the Presence of

· Sociology of religious experience

God in the World"

·Purpose of Torah study

Patai."The Shekhina"

Ritualization

M

· Liminality · Chaos, cosmos and law · Structure of Jewish Ritual: Sabbath, Bar-

Mitzvah, Marriage, Purim

Fishbane. "Judaism As Ritual System"



10. 10

W

Obedience and Communion · Legalistic intellectualism--Spirituality

6 The Legal System

Guttmann. "The Basic Ideas of Biblical Religion"

10. 12
10. 15 10. 17 10. 19 10. 22 10. 24 10. 26
10. 29 10. 31 11. 2

F Scripture--Constitution of Sacred Text

· Prophets · Priests · Judges · Scribes

· Rabbis

Midrash -- How to Read a Sacred Text

M

· Reading or Interpretation? · Scriptural Reasoning: Extrapolation,

Interpolation, & Divination

W

Religion of Law · Mishna · Talmud · Legal Codes

7 Philosophical-Political Theology

F Maimonides' Code of Law · Legalism and Anti Legalism
Philosophical Idea of God M · God, unknowable and unthinkable

W

Religious Doctrine I -- Creation & Prophecy · Religious naturalism

Religious Doctrine II -- Providence & the

F Problem of Evil

· Messianic realism

8 Mysticism & Theosophy

M The Mystical Image of God

· Primordial Adam

W

Mystical Anthropology · Demonic aspects of the universe

F

Theosophic Messianism · History must end!

9 Modern Challenges

Halbertal. 1-89
Stern,"Midrash and Hermeneutics" Halbertal. 90-134
Halbertal."What is the Mishne Torah?" Seeskin, 1-40 Benor."Meaning and Reference in
Maimonides' Negative Theology" Seeskin. 41-80 Funkenstein."Political Theory and Realistic
Messianism" Maimonides. Guide of the Perplexed III: 12
Green. A Guide to the Zohar. Part 1 Green. A Guide to the Zohar, Part 2 Green. A Guide to the Zohar, Part 3

11. 5 M 11. 7 W 11. 9 F

Absence of God · Presence through Absence · Radical Monotheism · Holocaust?
Orthodoxy & Fundamentalism · Anti Modern Modernism
The 3rd Jewish Commonwealth · Anti-religious Zionism · A "Jewish state

Magid."Through the Void. . ." Peperzak."Judaism and philosophy in
Levinas" (excerpt)
Soloveitchick."New Role of Texts in the Haredi World"
Friedman."The Lost Kiddush Cup" Batnitzky. "Religious Reform and Invention
of Modern Orthodoxy" [ch. 2]
Hartman. "The Third Jewish Commonwealth"
Batnitzky. "Rejection of Jewish Religion and birth of Jewish Nationalism" [ch. 8]

11. 12 M

Feminism and the Future

Levinas. "And God created Woman" Houptman"Feminist Perspectives on
Rabbinic Texts"

