Health Care and Health Care Policy
SOCY 28 Fall 2013 Tuesday/Thursday 10 am ­ 12 noon X Hour Wednesday 3-4:15 pm
Instructor: Valerie Lewis Office: Silsby 109 Email: valerie.a.lewis@dartmouth.edu Office hours: Tuesday/Thursday 8:45-9:45
Course Description This course explores the policy issues and implications associated with health care in the United States. We will explore the social, economic, organizational and institutional contexts of health care and medicine to answer questions such as, who is healthy in American society and who is not? Why are some healthy and others not? How is our health care system organized? And why is it different from most other industrialized nations? How does the organization of medical care affect the quality and cost of that care? Our goal will be to gain a deeper understanding of the organization and delivery of health care in the U.S., and to appreciate some of the relevant policy issues.
Course Requirements Class participation. Students are expected to read and reflect upon the assigned readings before coming to class and to participate in class.
Short reflection papers. Students are required to write two short papers (3-4 pages). Further details will be given in class. These papers will be due in the 4th and 8th weeks of the term.
Exams. We will have an in-class mid-term exam and a final exam that are based on the readings and material covered in class. I will provide review guides to help you prepare for these exams.
Final Course Grades are based on: Class attendance and participation ­ 10% Short paper 1 ­ 10% Short paper 2 ­ 10% Midterm exam ­ 30 % Final exam ­ 40 %
Required Reading The following materials are required.
1. Bodenheimer, Thomas and Kevin Grumbach. 2012. Understanding Health Policy: A Clinical Approach. McGraw-Hill.

2. Gawande, Atul. 2002. Complications: A Surgeon's Notes on an Imperfect Science. New York: Picador.
3. Sweet, Victoria. 2012. God's Hotel: A Doctor, A Hospital, and a Pilgrimage to the Heart of Medicine. New York: Riverhead Books.
Additional required readings are available on the course Blackboard site under the Assigned Readings button.
Important notes
Attendance. Participation counts as 10% of your course grade. If you do not attend class, you will not be able to participate and your grade will suffer.
Accommodations. Students with learning, physical or psychiatric disabilities who will be taking this course and may need disability-related classroom accommodations are encouraged to make an appointment to see me as soon as possible. All discussions will remain confidential, although the Student Disability Services office may be consulted to discuss appropriate implementation of any accommodation requested.
Writing and academic assistance. For individual peer tutorial assistance with papers, research, and new media projects, students may use RWIT, the Student Center for Research, Writing, and Information Technology. Make appointments online at www.dartmouth.edu/~rwit, or drop by the Center in Baker-Berry Library, Level One, from 4 to 6 pm and 7 to 10 pm, S-Th. ***
Honor Principle and work in this course. I will follow and enforce the Academic Honor Principle described in the Dartmouth College Student handbook. Students must do their own work, including writing your own papers and taking your own exams.

Course schedule and readings

Week

Topic

Reading

Week 1 ­ Background and introduction on American health care

Tu Sep 17

Introduction and background on US

health care system

(X HOUR ­ W Sep 18)

Th Sep 19

What is health? What is health care? Health Policy book Chapter 1, 3, 16

Becker, "On Becoming a Marijuana

User"

Aronowitz, "Lyme Disease: The Social

Construction of a New Disease"

Week 2 ­ Access: Who pays for health insurance in the United States?

Tu Sep 24

Private insurance: Employer

Health Policy book chapter 2

sponsored health insurance and

Blumenthal D. "Employer-Sponsored

exchanges

Health Insurance in the United

States ­ Origins and Implications."

NEJM, 355(1), 2006: 82-88.

(W ­ Sept 25)

Th Sep 26

Public insurance programs:

Kaiser Family Foundation fact sheets

Medicare, Medicaid, and

on Medicare, Medicaid, dual

uncompensated care

eligible

Baicker, Kate. 2013. "The Oregon

Health Insurance Experiment"

Week 3 ­ Who provides health care? Health care organizations

Tu Oct 1

Health care organizations

Cockerham, "The Hospital in Society"

Health policy book chapters 5 and 6

(W Oct 2)

Health care organizations

TBA

Th Oct 3

Physicians and their roles

Complications, Part 1 (3-108)

Wear, "On white coats and professional

development: the formal and hidden

curricula"

Branch, "Deconstructing the White

Coat"

Week 4 ­ Who provides health care? Health care providers

Tu Oct 8

Nurses, nurse practitioners, medical Chap 7, Health Policy book

assistants, physician assistant

NY Times series on Nurse Practitioners

(W Oct 9)

Th Oct 10

Class cancelled

Week 5 ­ Disparities and vulnerable populations in health care

Tu Oct 15

The health care safety net

Gawande, "The Hotspotters"

Lutfey, Karen and Jeremy Freese.

diabetes clinic article, AJS

Watch the Kaiser tutorial

http://www.kaiseredu.org/Tutorials-

(W Oct 16) Th Oct 17

and-Presentations/Americas-HealthCare-Safety-Net.aspx

Health disparities and health care Guest lecturer: Samir Soneji, PhD, Assistant Professor of the Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice and the Norris Cotton Cancer Center

Link, BG and J Phelan. 1995. "Social
Conditions as fundamental causes of disease." Journal of Health and
Social Behavior 80-94. Williams, DR and C Collins. 1995. "US
Socioeconomic and Racial Differences in Health: Patterns and
Explanations." Marmot et al. 1991. "Health
Inequalities among British Civil Servants: The Whitehall II Study."

Week 6 ­ Midterm

Tu Oct 22

Midterm review

(W Oct 23)

Th Oct 24

Midterm

Week 7 ­ How are physicians and health care providers paid for their work? Payment systems

and health care costs

Tu Oct 29

Health care provider

Health Policy book chapter 4, 8, 9

reimbursements

Brill, Steven. "Bitter Pill: Why Medical

Bills Are Killing Us" Time. 4

March 2013.

(W Oct 30)

Th Oct 31

Rising health care costs

Gawande, "The cost conundrum"

God's Hotel, chapters TBA

Week 8 ­ Variation in practice, care, and costs

Tu Nov 5

Cost containment

God's Hotel, chapters TBA

(W Nov 6)

Th Nov 7

Variation in medical practice

God's Hotel, chapters TBA

Week 9 ­ Issues in costs and quality

Tu Nov 12

Other cost issues: Pharmaceuticals Chandra, Amitabh, et al. "The Growth

and medical malpractice

of Physician Medical Malpractice

Payments." Health Affairs. 2005.

p240-249.

Gawande, Atul. "The Malpractice

Mess; Who pays the price when

patients sue doctors?" The New

Yorker, November 14, 2005.

TBA on pharmaceuticals

(W Nov 13)

Th Nov 14

How can the quality of health care Health Policy book chapter 10

be improved?

Bataldan, P.B. and F. Davidoff. "What

is Quality Improvement?"

Week 10 ­ Reform

Tu Nov 19

Payment and Delivery system

RAND, "Payment Reform: Analysis of

(W Nov 20) Th Nov 21

reform

Models and Performance Measurement Implications"
Fisher, "A National Strategy to Put Accountable Care into Practice"

The future of US health care; course Complications, Part 3 wrap up and final review

