Professor Kathryn J. Lively Classroom: Silsby 113 Class Meets 12 (12:30-1:35) X-Hour: T 1:00-1:50 Office Hours: M, W 2:00 or by appointment Email: kjl@dartmouth.edu
LOVE, ROMANCE, DATING & INTIMACY (though not necessarily in that order)
Sociologist C. Wright Mills described "the sociological imagination," as that quality of mind with the ability to grasp the interplay of biography and history, of self and social structure, of private troubles and public issues. In this course we will examine some of the cultural, structural, and historical conditions that shape one of the most profound sets of human experiences ­ those associated with love and relationships.
This course is being taught as a special topic and is listed as experimental. This means that things may be a little more in flux than other classes and may require you to "go with the flow" a little more than usual. However, it also means that you will be helping to create and shape this course for other students down the line.
There will be some lecture, and some discussion. There will be some days where we talk about the reading, but others we won't. Regardless of what we do, it is your responsibility to keep up with the reading (more on that below).
This course is designed to help you understand how our most deepest concerns, our most pertinent decisions, and our intimate moments are socially shaped and to help you navigate the structural and cultural strains that have made being in love, and staying that way, so damn hard.
Course Requirements:
Class Participation ­ 10% of your course grade
This will be an intensive working seminar, which means that everyone is expected to attend regularly and come to engage, actively and critically, in a discussion of the assigned readings. In the words of Professor King, "critical engagement necessitates bringing to bear all the theoretical, methodological, and analytical prowess in sociology that you have acquired." You are required to come to class with comments, questions, critiques of the assigned readings (not just summaries), as well as relevant (or complementary) examples from other research and current events.
Note: perfect attendance and answering questions only will get you a C. In order to move beyond average, you must be proactive. If you suffer from debilitating shyness, you should come see me before the second week of class.

If it becomes clear that you are not keeping up with the reading, I will implement daily quizzes and mandatory critical questions to be turned in the night before the assigned reading is due. Hopefully, it won't come to that.
Daily Questions/Class Participation ­ 10% of your grade
You will submit two questions to me via Blackboard two hours ahead of the regularly scheduled class period. Questions submitted after 10:00 on the day of class will not be accepted for credit.
These should be critical in nature and should be designed to facilitate class discussion.
This is not busy work. These assignments are designed to make sure that you have something to contribute to class and so that I can see what you're getting out of the reading, prior to class discussion. They also help me to better understand what's interesting to you, so that I can better cater my discussions to things in which you are interested. They should be things that you'd like to talk about. They can pertain straight to the reading or you may link the reading to things you've seen in the media, events on campus, etc. These start the second week of class; if there is more than one reading, your questions may address one or the other or both.
If your questions do not meet my criteria for "critical questions" - that is, they make an interesting and innovative point and they at least have the capacity to generate class discussion (so NO yes or no questions; no questions that simply begin, "So what do you guys think about....") I will send you an email and try to correct this off-line. If you don't hear from me, you're good. A critical question must indicate that you understand the reading, and that you are engaging the argument.
Again, Questions that actually critique the reading and have the potential to generate discussion will be viewed more positively than those that do not.
If you miss more than 3 days of questions, you automatically forfeit 10% of your letter grade..
Keep in mind that on any given day, I may call on you to ask your critical question for the days' reading and you are expected to ask it.
Class participation - this is a large class, but I expect you to be a good citizen. In my world, this means that you come to class on time, you stay off of the computer, you turn your phone off completely. You are an active listener. You will keep up with the reading and you will participate in class discussions. You participate in small groups. You maintain the respect, privacy, and confidentiality of your classmates.
If it comes to my attention (or I suspect) that you are not being a good citizen, you can expect to hear from me.
Short paper ­ 20% (4 to 5 pages, double spaced, single sided [or 2 to 3 pages double sided])

Think back over your life and identity three or more of the following: your favorite movie, book, television show or series, or song(s) that dealt with the subject of love. As for movies, it could have been a romantic film (e.g. Pride and Prejudice, Something About Mary, He's Just Not That Into You, 27 Dresses, or Sleepless in Seattle) or a non-romantic film (e.g., Die Hard or Fight Club) that nonetheless contained some element that influenced the way you think about love. If you can't think of anything, this is the one cultural artifact you turn to (or want to watch, read, or listen to) during breakups, relationships, bouts of unrequited love, etc. Use the time out of class to revisit these films, TV shows, songs, etc., and then analyze them for their messages about love. How have these messages influenced your own life either when it comes to relationships or how you think about relationships? Use examples from your own life to support your work.
Feel free to talk to friends about their cultural influencers about love and incorporate them into your analysis.
You may want to frame your paper in terms of the cultural and/or structural perspectives of emotion that we discussed during the first few weeks of class.
This can be turned in at any time between weeks three and six ­ it's up to you!
Blog ­ 20% of your grade
You will be asked to keep a blog for this class, using Blackboard.
Your topic will coincide with that of the class. You may use the blog to respond creatively to the readings as well as to cultural memes regarding love, dating, intimacy, and romance that you encounter in the real world - however, you must do so vis-a-vis a theoretical lens.
I expect you to cast a wide net. There are a lot of important issues surrounding the topics we discuss. You could address the issues of hazing (which, as we will discuss, is an extreme form of intimacy), you could address the ongoing debates about birth control, abortion, and other issues pertaining to intimacy or sex. You may link to YouTube videos or other blogs (iVillage.com, OKCupid.com - which, has an amazing blog, Match.com, etc). However, you cannot JUST link to them, you must offer some critical/constructive/thoughtful analysis. You should use this medium to find your own voice on these topics - you will be graded not on your stance or ideology, but in how sociological/critical you are in your approach to you subject.
You should plan on writing, at minimum, two blog posts (300-500 words each) a week and comment on at least five of your classmates posts, per week. You may of course also link to your classmate's posts.
At the end of the term, you will be given the names of three students (randomly generated by me) and you will grade them anonymously, on a set of criteria that I will provide. You will turn these evaluations into me and they will then become part of their course grade. I expect you to take this as seriously as you would like your graders to take their assessment of you. You will not be graded by the people you are assessing.

Oral Histories & Final Paper - 50%
You must collect two oral histories (3 if you chose to include your own information) regarding people's crush/dating/relationship history (that is, their romantic histories; these do not necessarily mean sexual histories. We will, as a class, develop the history guidelines. You will submit two histories (one no later than May 2, the other no later than May 18). These will be graded by me, then anonymized and placed in a common data source.
For your final paper, you must analyze some aspect of histories in this archive. You may choose to look at one of the topic areas (first crushes or same-sex crushes, for example) across age, gender, race, ethnicity, social class, etc. Your paper should include a relevant literature review (tailored to your individual question), a discussion of the methods used to collect the data, how your decisions regarding which (and how many) histories to use in your analysis, your methods of analysis, your actual analysis (which will include actual data), and a conclusion, which speaks to some of the broader sociological issues as well as the limitations of your research (15 - 20 pages).
http://www.dartmouth.edu/~writing/materials/student/soc_sciences/sociology.shtml
Policies:
I am not your mother, nor are you my children. Thus, I will not monitor you or nag you about doing your assignments. If you don't do them, you don't do them. I understand that you have other commitments and priorities. Part of being in college is learning how to manage competing priorities. However, there are consequences.
In return for this, you will not ask for extensions, offer excuses, or plea bargain for grades, points, etc.
I do not change grades, because grades are relative in courses like this and if I were to change yours, I would essentially have to change everyone else's in order to be fair, which would essentially invalidate the change that you're requesting.
And, finally, if you don't come to class, turn in an assignment, etc, that's your business. I will not take it personally. I will not get mad. And I will not "not like" you.
We're all adults. Deal?
Attendance · I do expect you to attend class. It is to your advantage to get to class because: 1) active participation is important to your grade (and it is necessary to be in class to participate), and 2) information gleaned from mini-lectures and discussions will be designed to help you in subsequent papers and writing assignments. · Having said that, however, I understand that some absences are unavoidable. Therefore, missing more than three class periods, regardless of the reason, will result in a lowering

of your final grade by 5%. Furthermore, each additional day's absence will result in additional 5% deduction. In other words, if you miss 4 days of class, you will face a 10% reduction in your final grade. You are also responsible for handing in your typed comment questions (in total for the days missed) upon your return to class. If you have other commitments this term that require you to be away more than four class periods, you may want to consider taking a different class or taking this class at a different time.
Papers
· Use citations when you are quoting or borrowing from the work of others. Any literature you cite or quote should be properly and consistently referenced. See the quote below from the Academic Honor Principle.
· I will not accept late papers without a note from the Dean's office. Please remember that printers are most likely to fail when you are in a hurry, so do not be in a hurry.
· Though I should not have to specify this at this point in the game, writing matters! I know that everyone is pressed for time, but you must read your work (off the printed page ­ preferably out loud) before you turn it in! You'd be surprised how many mistakes you miss when just glancing across the screen. If it appears to me that you have not read your paper before turning it in or the writing is sufficiently bad, you will be asked to rewrite it.
· For help with your writing, visit the Composition Center. Call 6-3525, visit 108 Sanborn to make a free appointment, or get additional information about the Center and college writing at: http://www.dartmouth.edu/~compose. (I can also meet with you individually.)
· Unlike most courses you may have had up until this point, I encourage you to work together on your projects and papers. This does not mean that you may turn in joint assignments. Rather, I encourage you to discuss the books with your classmates before you write your individual papers. You must, however, give credit where credit is due. If you work together, you must identify the other students in the class with whom you have worked.
Exams
· There are NO exams in this course.
Cheating and Plagiarism
· In the words of Professor Lewis, "do not cheat, do not plagiarize; follow the honor code and your own internal moral compass. Do not be afraid to talk to me if you have any questions about this issue."
"A number of actions are specifically prohibited by the Academic Honor Principle. These focus on plagiarism and on academic dishonesty in the taking of examinations, the writing of papers, the use of the same work in more than one course, and unauthorized collaboration." ...
"Any form of plagiarism violates the Academic Honor Principle. Plagiarism is defined as the submission or presentation of work, in any form, that is not a student's own, without

acknowledgment of the source. With specific regard to papers, a simple rule dictates when it is necessary to acknowledge sources. If a student obtains information or ideas from an outside source, that source must be acknowledged. Another rule to follow is that any direct quotations must be placed in quotation marks, and the source immediately cited. Students are responsible for the information concerning plagiarism found in Sources: Their Use and Acknowledgment, available in the Dean's Offices and at http://www.dartmouth.edu/~sources."
** Students with learning, physical or psychiatric disabilities who will be taking this course and may need disability-related classroom accommodations are encouraged to make an appointment to see me as soon as possible, and by the end of the second week of classes. Also, contact the Academic Skills Center, 6-2014, asc@dartmouth.edu, 301 Collis Center to register for support services.**
Required Reading
Schalet, Amy. 2011. Not Under My Roof: Parents, Teems, and the Culture of Sex Bogle, Kathleen. 2008. Hooking Up: Sex, Dating, and Relationships on Campus. Newmahr, Staci. 2011. Playing on the Edge: Sadomasochism, Risk and Intimacy Carpenter, Laura 2009. Virginity Lost: An Intimate Portrait of First Sexual Experience
Either:
Double Your Dating - David D'Angelo (available online) at www.doubleyourdating.com ($14.95)
Catch Him and Keep Him - Christian Carter (available online at www.catchhimandkeephim.com ($24.95)
or
Have The Relationship You Want - Rory Raye (available at www.havetherelationshipyouwant.com) ($14.95)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Week One
March 26 - Introduction to the Course
March 28 - Sociological Theories
March 29th - Lisa Wade, "The Hook Up Culture." (high recommended); Rocky 2 4:30 (http://lisa-wade.com/public-speaking/prepared-talks/#The Promise and Perils)
March 30 - Sociological v. Popular Conceptions of Love ---------------------------------------------------------Week Two -Virginity

April 2 - Virginity Lost, Introduction, Chapters 1&2
April 4 - Virginity Lost, Chapters 3-5
April 6 - Virginity Lost, Chapters 6&7 YouTube: Virginity Pledges (in class)
Recommended Viewing: Easy A or 40 Year Old Virgin (sociological movie reviews make great blog posts!) ---------------------------------------------------------Week Three - Sex
April 9 - Not Under My Roof, Chapters 1 - 3
April 11 - Not Under My Roof, Chapters 4 - 6
April 13 - Not Under My Roof, Chapters 7-8 & Conclusion --------------------------------------------------------Week Four - Hooking Up
April 16 - Hooking Up, Chapters 1-4
April 17 X-Hour 1:00 - 1:50 p.m. (if necessary, but you should count on it)
April 18 - Bogle, Chapters 5-8
April 20 - NO CLASS ---------------------------------------------------------Week Five - Hooking Up - Continued
April 23 General Studies
Julie A. Reid, Sinikka Elliott and Gretchen R. Webber. "Casual Hookups to Formal Dates: Refining the Boundaries of the Sexual Double Standard."
McClintock, Elizabeth Aura. "When Does Race Matter? Race, Sex, and Dating at an Elite University"
Carolyn Bradshaw & Arnold S. Kahn & Bryan K. Saville. "To Hook Up or Date: Which Gender Benefits?"
April 25 ­ Guest Speaker: Raj Majumder (Class of '11, intern at Real Social Dynamics)

April 27 - Armstrong, Hamilton and England "Is Hooking Up Bad For Young Women?" http://contexts.org/articles/summer-2010/is-hooking-up-bad-for-young-women/
Film: The Hook Up Culture (In Class) ------------------------------------------------------------Week Six - Dating
April 30 - NO CLASS (Selections from the Game; available on Blackboard)
May 1 - X-Hour 1:00 - 1:50 p.m.
May 2 - "Double Your Dating" or "Finding Mr Right"
May 4 - Guest Speaker - Raj Majumder (Class of '11, intern at Real Social Dynamics)
Recommended Viewing: Hitch or Stupid, Crazy, Love ---------------------------------------------------------Week Seven - Intimacy
May 7 - Dance With Me: Ballroom Dancing and the Promise of Instant Intimacy, Intro I&II, Chapters 1-3
May 9 - Dance With Me, Chapters 3-6
May 11 - Dance With Me, Chapters 6-9 ---------------------------------------------------------Week Eight - Intimacy (continued)
May 14 - Playing on the Edge: Sadomasochism, Risk, and Intimacy: Concluding Notes, Introduction, Part One: People
May 16 - Playing on the Edge: Part Two: Play
May 18 - Playing on the Edge: Part Three: Edges
Recommended Viewing (only if you have a strong stomach, Quills or 9 1/2 Weeks) ---------------------------------------------------------Week Nine -Non-Heteronormative/Monogamous Arrangements
May 21 -Slavin, S. (02/2009). "'Instinctively, I'm Not Just a Sexual Beast': The Complexity of Intimacy Among Australian Gay Men"Sexualities (1363-4607), 12 (1), p. 79.
Eyre, Arnold, Peterson& Strong. "Romantic Relationships and Their Social Context Among Gay/Bisexual Male Youth in the Castro District of San Francisco"
May 23 - Monogamy? Maybe Not

Knapp, Jacquelyn J. "An Exploratory Study of Seventeen Sexually Open Marriages."
Ritchie, Ani and Meg Barker. `There Aren't Words for What We Do or How We Feel So We Have to Make Them Up': Constructing Polyamorous Languages in a Culture of Compulsory Monogamy.
May 25 - Polyamory or Polyagony? Jealousy in Open Relationships
Video: In Class, tba
--------------------------------------------------------Week Ten - Changing Demographics and What they Mean for Families
May 28 - Gerson (selected readings)
Hannah Rosen
May 30 - "Bachelorette, 34"

