SOCY 56/WGST 34.4 The Sociology of Gender
Winter Quarter 2014
Class Meets in 113 Silsby Hall, 2A: TR 2:00­3:50pm (X-hour: W 4:15-5:05pm)
Professor Janice McCabe Office: 105 Silsby Hall Email: janice.m.mccabe@dartmouth.edu Phone: 603-646-8160 Office hours: Monday 10:00-12:00 or by appointment
Course Description:
What is gender? This seminar examines multiple sociological perspectives on what it means to be a woman, man, boy, or girl in everyday life - including gender as a social structure, an identity, an ideology, and something people "do." Readings and discussions reflect a belief that diversity (race/ethnicity, class, age, sexuality, etc.) is central to the study of gender. Possible topics include: language, the body, science, the wage gap, education, and masculinity during young adulthood.
Learning Objectives:
By the end of this course, students will: 1. Be exposed to a wide range of texts about gender 2. Be able to identify, explain, and analyze concepts used in the sociological study of gender 3. Be able to identify and defend different theoretical approaches to the study of gender 4. Have practiced discussing sociological scholarship on gender 5. Have engaged in sociological research on gender and shared their findings in an oral and written report 6. Develop a deeper understanding of how gender shapes our personal experiences, views, choices and behavior
Course Requirements and Evaluation:
1. Attendance and participation. This is absolutely necessary if a seminar is to be successful. Participation will help you better process and understand the material we cover while also increasing our collective understanding. One of the most stimulating and pleasurable things about seminars is the opportunity to raise and grapple with wide-ranging questions about topics covered in a course. The benefits of this class come from talking as well as listening and reading. Failure to act in a professional manner during class will influence your grade in the course.
2. Keeping up with the reading. In order for our class discussions to be lively and productive, students must complete the assigned readings prior to class.
The following required books are available for purchase at the Dartmouth Bookstore and Wheelock Books. They are also available on 2-hour reserve in Baker Library.
(1) A reader, The Kaleidoscope of Gender: Prisms, Patterns, and Possibilities (Fourth Edition), Edited by Joan Z. Spade and Catherine G. Valentine, Sage, 2014. ISBN: 9781452205410
1

(2) Collins, Patricia Hill. Fighting Words: Black Women and the Search for Justice. University of Minnesota Press, 1998. ISBN: 0816623775
(3) Pascoe, C.J. Dude, You're a Fag: Masculinity and Sexuality in High School. University of California Press, 2007. ISBN: 9780520252301
Additional readings are available on our course Blackboard site.
3. Seminar facilitation. Each student must co-facilitate one seminar discussion. Seminar facilitators are responsible for one hour of class time, including presentation and discussion. Your presentation should be 10-15 minutes and you should prepare a visual presentation (such as PowerPoint) or distribute a handout with written questions and/or comments to the class to structure the discussion. The facilitators will have help from other students who will be prepared with their own comments and questions. The idea is to inspire lively, challenging discussion. Facilitators should briefly summarize the material but then raise issues, themes, questions, or reflections on the reading's implications for the sociology of gender, for work of your own, for social change, or for whatever seems pertinent to your intellectual concerns. Presentations may cover only one reading or may synthesize several readings. You must let me know which reading(s) you will be presenting on and provide an outline of what you plan to cover at least 48 hours before the class you will facilitate (e.g., by Sunday at 2:00 for a Tuesday presentation; Tuesday at 2:00 for a Thursday presentation).
4. Memos. You will write four memos on the required readings throughout the semester (your choice of the four class sessions). Each memo should critically analyze at least two issues, points, or concepts that you found to be the most useful or interesting from the readings assigned that session. Each memo should discuss at least two readings for that day (unless there is only one reading assigned) and discuss ties between the readings (e.g., how ideas, evidence, or styles of argumentation in these readings converge or diverge).
In each memo, provide your own critical analysis of the argument and/or claims ­ for example, consider the assumptions the arguments lie on, what evidence is used in support of the argument, or what the implications of the arguments are. Rather than simply agreeing or disagreeing with a reading, you must offer a well-reasoned explanation of your perspective on the author's arguments. You may, for example, connect the readings to each other, to previous course materials or discussions that the class has had and/or to your experiences outside of the classroom or to materials you have read or seen in other classes. Possible guiding questions for a memo include: Do the readings make similar arguments? Do they disagree with one another? What do these readings taken as a group suggest about the sociology of gender? How do these readings contribute to the larger issues we are addressing? Are there other points that these authors do not address, but should? How effectively does the evidence support their arguments; what other evidence might be more effective and why? Do your own experiences seem to confirm or deny the arguments made in a particular set of readings; how and why? End your memo with a concluding sentence or two that brings the different paragraphs of the memo together. Be sure to read all of the readings listed in the syllabus for the date you will turn in your memo.
Your grade on each memo will reflect not only your ideas, but your ability to convey these ideas clearly. In other words, writing quality matters so it is to your benefit to rewrite and proofread your memos before turning them in.
2

Memos should be one single-spaced page in length; Memos should be no longer than 1 ½ pages and no shorter than ¾ of a page. A hardcopy of the memo is due at the beginning of class. Late memos will not be accepted. You may NOT turn in a memo on the day you do a group presentation or do more than one on Dude, You're a Fag; otherwise, the choice of dates is up to you. These memos comprise 20% of your course grade (5% each).
5. An end-of-the-semester paper and presentation. Your final paper will be 10-12 pages, double spaced, and be a research paper focused on a topic of your choice related to gender. In order to complete this paper, you will conduct sociological research and a scholarly literature review on a topic of your choice.
You will share the results of your research with the class during a 10-minute presentation in the last week of the term.
You will submit a short (1-page) proposal of the topic you are considering for your final paper. Before class on 1/28, you should post your proposal to your assigned discussion board on Blackboard. In class, we will discuss proposal review. Before class on 1/30, you should have reviewed two peers' proposals and posted those to your discussion board on Blackboard. You will receive feedback from two classmates (and provide feedback to two classmates). You should respond to these reviews on your discussion board and revise your proposal. The next class session, on 2/4, you will turn in a revised version of this proposal to me and post it on Blackboard. I will provide feedback to you.
Your paper should include: (A) An introduction, which identifies your topic and discusses why this topic is important (B) A short review of the scholarly literature on this topic. You should include at least 3 course readings and 8-10 additional readings. You should discuss this research, what it concludes, and what unanswered questions remain. (C) A methods section that includes your research question and how you went about answering it. In other words, what did you expect to find, what sociological research method did you use, and who/what did you study? (D) Discuss the main findings of your study. What did you find, and did it confirm your expectations? It is likely that you will not be able to discuss everything that you found, so you should focus on the findings that link to your research question and discussion of the scholarly literature on this topic. (E) What conclusions can you draw from your study? What did you learn through conducting this research, what questions remain, and what might future research address? (F) Include a reference list that includes any sources you cite.
Note: I will not read text beyond the page limits of the assignment. Unless we've made prior arrangements, I will not accept electronic versions of your papers; please turn in stapled hard copies of your papers. You can hand them in to me in person or to my mailbox in 111 Silsby by 3PM on Wednesday, March 12.
3

Grading:
Percentage of Final Grade Attendance & Participation Seminar Facilitation Memos Paper Proposal Final Paper Presentation of Final Paper

10% 15% 20% 5% 40% 10%

Final Course Grade A = 93.0-100 A- = 90.0-92.9 B+ = 87.0-89.9 B = 83.0-86.9 B- = 80.0-82.9 C+ = 77.0-79.9

C = 73.0-76.9 C- = 70.0-72.9 D+ = 67.0-69.9 D = 63.0-66.9 D- = 60.0-62.9 F < 60.0

Course Guidelines and Policies:
Honor Principle: Examinations and assignments will be conducted in accord with the principles
of academic honor detailed in the Dartmouth Organization, Regulations and Courses. I also encourage students to read Dartmouth's statement on Sources and Citations:
http://www.dartmouth.edu/~writing/sources/

Religious Holidays: Some students may wish to take part in religious observances that occur during this academic term. If you have a religious observance that conflicts with your participation in the course, please meet with me ASAP to discuss appropriate accommodations.

Students with Disabilities: Students with disabilities enrolled in this course and who may need disability-related classroom accommodations are encouraged to make an appointment to see me as soon as possible, and by the end of the second week of the term. All discussions will remain confidential, although the Student Accessibility Services office may be consulted to discuss appropriate implementation of any accommodation requested. Information about Student Accessibility Services is available at: http://www.dartmouth.edu/~accessibility/

Missed Classes: Students should notify the instructor of any anticipated absences. In the event that you miss a class for any reason, you are responsible for getting class notes for that class from another student. As a general policy, I do not make my notes available. After you review your classmate's notes, I would be happy to meet with you to talk about the material or answer questions about anything that is unclear. If you miss more than three days of class, your participation grade will decrease by one whole letter grade, and decrease by one step (e.g., B to B-) for each additional absence.
Late Submissions: The submission of assignments is expected on the indicated "due date" during that day's class meeting (unless otherwise stated). Requests for extensions should be made prior to the due date. Please note that grades on non-approved late submissions will be penalized. Any work turned in more than 10 minutes after the start of class is considered late and the grade will be reduced by one step (for example, from a B to a B-). The grade will be reduced by an additional step for each day it is late. Work turned in after class begins is considered one day late. Work turned in the day after class is considered two days late.
Classroom Etiquette: Disruptions to class negatively affect everyone's ability to learn. If you must arrive late or leave early, please notify the instructor in advance and sit by the door to minimize disruptions. It is inappropriate to use cell phones or use laptops for activities outside of taking notes (such as email or facebook). Disruptions will reduce your participation grade.

4

Class Schedule:
Readings that are not from any of the books (Kaleidoscope, PHC or Kimmel) are available online at our class Blackboard site (B).

DATE

TOPIC AND READINGS

1/7 T Introduction to Course

No Readings

1/9 R Introduction to Feminist and Other Theoretical Approaches
 Kaleidoscope, Introduction (pages xiii-xxiv)  (B) National Organization for Women (NOW). 1968. "Bill of Rights."
www.now.org  (B) Evelyn Reed. 1970. "Women: Caste, Class, or Oppressed Sex?"
International Socialist Review 31(3):15-17 & 40-41.  (B) Steven Goldberg, "Is Patriarchy Inevitable?"
 (B) National Organization for Men Against Sexism (NOMAS). 1975. "Statement of Principles." www.nomas.org/principles

 (B) Marilyn Frye. 1983. "Oppression." The Politics of Reality. Crossing Press. 1/14 T  (B) Luce Irigaray. 1985. "This Sex Which is Not One." Excerpt from This Sex
Which is Not One. Cornell University Press.  (B) David M. Buss. 1985. "The Strategies of Human Mating." American
Scientist 82:238-249.
 PHC. Fighting Words. Introduction & Part I.

1/16 R Gender as Masculinities and Femininities  (B) Lois Gould, "X: A Fabulous Child's Story"  Kaleidoscope, Reading 2. Betsy Lucal, "What It Means to Be Gendered Me"  Kaleidoscope, Reading 3. Sharon Preves, "Beyond Pink and Blue"  Kaleidoscope, Reading 4. Maria Charles, "What Gender is Science?"
GUEST LECTURE BY PIPER COUTINHO-SLEDGE

1/21 T Gender as an Institutionalized System
 Kaleidoscope, Reading 1. Barbara Risman, "Gender as a Social Structure: Theory Wrestling with Activism"
 Kaleidoscope, Reading 31. Joan Acker, "Inequality Regimes: Gender, Class and Race in Organizations"
 Kaleidoscope, Reading 32. Christine Williams et al., "Gendered Organizations in the New Economy"
 Kaleidoscope, Reading 37. Veronica Jaris Tichenor, "Thinking About Gender and Power in Marriage"

5

DATE 1/23 R

TOPIC AND READINGS
Gender in Interactions and Gendered Interactions  (B) Candace West and Donald Zimmerman. 1987. "Doing Gender." Gender &
Society 1:125-151.  (B) Barbara Risman. 2009. "From Doing to Undoing: Gender As We Know It"
Gender & Society 23:81-84.  (B) Kristen Schilt and Laurel Westbrook. 2009. "Doing Gender, Doing
Heteronormativity." Gender & Society 23(4):440-464.  (B) Jocelyn A. Hollander. 2013. "`I Demand More of People': Accountability,
Interaction, and Gender Change." Gender & Society 27(1):5-29.

1/28 T Learning Gender
PROPOSAL DUE (POST TO DISCUSSION BOARD ON BLACKBOARD)
 Kaleidoscope, Reading 17. Emily Kane, "`No Way My Boys Are Going to Be Like That!': Parents' Responses to Children's Gender Nonconformity"
 Kaleidoscope, Reading 18. Janice McCabe et al., "Gender in Twentieth-Century Children's Books"
 Kaleidoscope, Reading 19. Richard Mora, "`Do It for All Your Pubic Hairs!': Latino Boys, Masculinity and Puberty"
 Kaleidoscope, Reading 21. "The Pink Dragon is Female: Halloween Costumes and Gender Markers"

1/30 R Feminist Critiques of Knowledge
PROPOSAL REVIEW DUE (POST TO BLACKBOARD)  (B) Sandra Harding. 1986. "From Feminist Empiricism to Feminist Standpoint
Epistemologies" (Chapter 6) in The Science Question in Feminism. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.  (B) Donna Haraway. 1988. "Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in
Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective." Feminist Studies 14:575-
599.  (B) Uma Narayan. 1989. "The Project of Feminist Epistemology: Perspectives
from a Nonwestern Feminist" in Gender/Body/Knowledge, eds. Alison M.
Jaggar and Susan R. Bordo. Rutgers University Press.
 PHC. Fighting Words. Part II.

2/4 T Multiple Identities in a Transnational Context
REVISED PROPOSAL & RESPONSE DUE (BRING 1 COPY OF REVISED
PROPOSAL TO CLASS & POST BOTH TO BLACKBOARD)  Kaleidoscope, Reading 10. Bandana Purkayastha, "Intersectionality in a
Transnational World"
 (B) Viterna, Jocelyn. 2013. Chapters 4 and 7 from Women in War: The MicroProcesses of Mobilization in El Salvador
GUEST LECTURE BY DR. JOCELYN VITERNA

6

DATE 2/6 R

TOPIC AND READINGS
Sexualities and Queer Theory  (B) Gayle Rubin. 1993 [1984]. "Thinking Sex: Notes for a Radical Theory of
the Politics of Sexuality" in The Lesbian and Gay Studies Reader, eds. Henry
Abelove, Michele Aina Barale, and David Halperin. Routledge.  (B) Judith Butler. 1991. "Imitation and Gender Insubordination" in Inside Out:
Lesbian Theories, Gay Theories, ed. Diana Fuss. Routledge.
 Kaleidoscope, Reading 42. Laura Hamilton and Elizabeth A. Armstrong, "Gendered Sexuality in Young Adulthood"
GUEST LECTURE BY DR. REESE KELLY

2/11 T Work and Family  Kaleidoscope, Reading 33. Adia Harvey Wingfield, "Racializing the Glass Escalator: Reconsidering Men's Experiences With Women's Work"  Kaleidoscope, Reading 36. Kathleen Gerson, "Moral Dilemmas, Moral Strategies and the Transformation of Family Change"  (B) Marybeth Mattingly and Kristin Smith. 2010. "Changes in Wives'
Employment When Husbands Stop Working: A Recession-Prosperity Comparison." Family Relations 59:343-357.  (B) Kristin Smith. 2012. "Recessions Accelerate Trend of Wives as Breadwinners." Carsey Institute Issue Brief 56: 1-4.
GUEST LECTURE BY DR. KRISTIN SMITH

2/13 R Intersectionality and Identity Politics
 Kaleidoscope, Reading 7. Bonnie Thornton Dill and Marla H. Kohlman, "Intersectionality: A Transformative Paradigm in Feminist Theory and Social Justice"
 (B) Janice McCabe. 2011. "Doing Multiculturalism: An Interactionist Analysis of the Practices of a Multicultural Sorority." Journal of Contemporary
Ethnography 40(5):521-549.
 PHC. Fighting Words. Part III.

2/18 T Violence and the Body
 Kaleidoscope, Reading 44. Kristin L. Anderson and Debra Umberson, "Gendering Violence: Masculinity and Power in Men's Accounts of Domestic Violence"
 Kaleidoscope, Reading 11. Christine Helliwell, "`It's Only a Penis': Rape, Feminism and Difference"
 (B) Gloria Steinem, "If Men Could Menstruate"

2/19 W Language (X-hour: W 4:15-5:05pm)
 (B) Sherryl Kleinman, "Why Sexist Language Matters" (AlterNet.com article)
 Kaleidoscope, Reading 39. Irene Padavic and Jonniann Butterfield, "Mothers, Fathers, and `Mathers': Negotiating a Lesbian Co-Parental Identity"

2/20 R NO CLASS

7

DATE

TOPIC AND READINGS

Theory Application

2/25 T  Pascoe, Dude, You're a Fag, Chapters 1-3

2/27 R  Pascoe, Dude, You're a Fag, Chapters 4-5

Social Change 3/4 T  Pascoe, Dude, You're a Fag, Chapter 6 & Appendix
 (B) Kevin Powell, "Confessions of a Recovering Misogynist"
STUDENT PRESENTATIONS (IF NEEDED)

3/6 R STUDENT PRESENTATIONS

3/12 W FINAL PAPER DUE BY 3PM on Wednesday, March 12

8

