Consumer Culture--SOCY 49.08
Prof. Goodman

Course Description: This class will introduce you to the scholarly analysis of advertising
and consumer culture. The purpose of this class is to encourage your creative inquiry
through discussion and writing about the key social, moral, political and practical
questions concerning consumer culture.
We will cover the following topics: History & Economics of Consumer Culture We will examine what is distinct about consumer culture and how it has evolved. We will also examine the ideas of consumer sovereignty, commodification and brands. Macro Forces This section looks at the large, society-wide forces involved in advertising and consumption. It looks at how individuals are "locked in" to increased consumption, how consumer culture has expanded, and the effects of advertising and consumer culture on the environment and on inequality. Micro Forces This section looks at the small individual decisions and identities that are involved in advertising and consumption, such as shopping, fashion, values and rebellion. Institutional Effects We will analyze the effects that advertising and consumer culture has on various institutions, such as religion, culture, politics, charities and education. Alternative Consumption We will finish by look at criticisms of consumer culture, as well as some of the proposed alternatives, such as citizenship, a new kind of hedonism, government regulation and alternative forms of consumption.

Grades: Your grade will depend on reading points, written assignments and three exams, according to the following formula:

Reading Points

10%

Critique Paper 1

10%

Critique Paper 2

15%

First Exam

15%

Second Exam

25%

Final

25%

Incompletes will only be given when the student is otherwise passing the course and cannot complete it due to circumstances that are unforeseen and beyond the student's control.

Reading Points: I will provide reading points for your readings. You will be graded on your ability to provide a summary of the author on one of those points when called on in class. If I can tell that you've done the reading and thought about the point, you will get an A. Only students called on in class will be graded on that day. I will use a random number generator before each

class to determine who will be called on. If you are absent the day that I call on you without a college defined excuse, you will receive an 'F'. Since most students are likely to be called on only 1 or 2 times, it is important that you be prepared for every class. Some students may never be called on, in which case they will receive an 'A'. I will give everyone one 'free pass' for the semester on reading points. In other words, you can let me know that you will be unprepared to answer the reading points for that day. However, you must do this before class starts, either in person, phone message or email. You will not be given a free pass after I have called on you.
Critique Papers: There will be two critique papers. You will choose a class reading and write a 4-5 page paper critiquing it. The first critique paper should deal with a reading from "History & Economics" or "Macro Forces." The second critique paper should deal with a reading from "Micro Forces" or "Institutional Effects." Fuller descriptions of these assignments will be posted on Canvas.
Exams: The exams will be 9/29, 10/24 & 11/25. The exams will be written in class. Some of the questions will be a variant of the reading points. Two long essay questions will give you a list of concepts and ask you to apply them to an example. The exams are not cumulative.
Readings: All readings will be provided as downloadable pdf's on Canvas. Please let me know if you anticipate any problems with those formats and we will figure out an alternative.
Help: I will hold office hours in Silsby 12 Mon, Wed & Fri from 9:00 to 10:00 and from 11:05 to noon. If those times don't work, I'm happy to make an appointment. Messages can be left for me in the Sociology office. I can be reached for help by phone (857.399.6137) or email (Douglas.J.Goodman@Dartmouth.edu). I check my email often and it is my preferred mode of communication.
Please let me know if you have any disabilities which will affect your participation in this class. I will make every effort to accommodate you.

Schedule
This schedule is provisional. The most current schedule will be on Blackboard
History & Economics Wed. Sep. 17 -- History Consumption to Consumer Culture - Goodman Time & Money - Cross Fri. Sep. 19 -- Therapeutic Ethos Salvation to Self-realization - Lears Advertising Success - Brasted Mon. Sep. 22 -- Economics Adam Smith & Invisible Hand Ignored Manipulation of the Market - Van Tuinen Practical Domain of Marketing - Benton Wed. Sep. 24 -- Commodification Theory of Commodification - Goodman Commodification as a Worldview - Radin Commodity Frontier - Hochschild Fri. Sep. 26 -- Brands Brands - Twitchell Silence of the Brands - Salzer-Morling & Stannegard Consumption in a Moralized Brandscape - Salzer-Morling & Stannegard
Mon. Sep. 29 -- First Exam
Macro Forces Wed. Oct. 1 -- Social Forces for Consumption Willing Consumers or Locked In - Sanne Spending into Adulthood - Penman & McNeill Consuming Because Others Consume - Lichtenberg Fri. Oct. 3 -- Ecological Ecological Footprint - Franz & Papyrakis Market & Non-market determinates of Consumption - Cogoy Branding Disaster - Humphries & Thompson Mon. Oct. 6 -- Expanding Consumer Culture Commercialization of Childhood - Levin & Linn Hypperreality & Globalization Commercialization of the Calendar - Schmidt

Wed. Oct. 8 -- Inequality in Consumer Culture Inequality in Consumer Culture - Goodman Marketing Blackness - Crockett Representations of Masculinity & Femininity in Advertising - O'Barr
Fri. Oct. 10 -- More Gender Listening to Khakis - Gladwell Commodity Lesbianism - Clark Advertising & Male Gender Change - Gentry & Harrison
Micro Forces Mon. Oct. 13 -- Shopping Acts of Consumption - Berger Shopping - Fiske I Shop Therefore I Am - Campbell Wed. Oct. 15 -- Comfort & Fashion Blue Jeans Comfortable -- Miller & Woodward I Just Wear What I Like - Newholm & Hopkinson Fri. Oct. 17 -- Identity Bazaar Identity Bazaar - Elliott Drugs & Consumer Society - van Ree Identity & Consumption - Shankar et al Mon. Oct. 20 -- Consuming Values Materialistic Values - Kasser et al Distorted Mirror - Pollay Wed. Oct. 22 -- Consuming Rebellion Commodification of Rebellion - Seiler Nation of Rebels - Heath & Potter
Institutional Effects Fri. Oct. 24 -- Consuming Religion Consuming Religion - Miller
Mon. Oct. 27 -- Second Exam
Wed. Oct. 29 -- Consuming Culture Capital Effects - Crary Culture Consumed - Firat Pessimism vs Populism - Clarke
Fri. Oct. 31 -- Consuming Politics Political Brand - Smith & French Political Consumerism - Holzer

Mon. Nov. 3 -- Consuming Compassion Compassion Inc. - Einstein
Wed. Nov. 5 -- Consuming Education Consuming Schools - Norris Education as Lite Entertainment - Edmundson
Alternative Consumption Fri. Nov. 7 -- Critiques of Consumerism Delectable Materialism - Schudson Consumption, Well-Being & Capability - Crocker Cultural Jamming - Harold Mon. Nov. 10 -- Citizens or Consumers Citizen Consumer Hybrid; Whole Foods Market - Johnston Citizens, Consumers and the Good Society - Schudson Wed. Nov. 12 -- Tamed Hedonism Rethinking the Good Life - Sopar Good of Consuming - Campbell Tamed Hedonism - Sassatelli Fri. Nov. 14 -- Regulation New Consumerism, 1960-1980 Promises: Self-regulating tobacco ads - Pollay Mon. Nov. 17 --Alternative Consumption Tribal Marketing - Cova Voluntary Simplicity - Etzioni Consuming Authenticity - Zukin
Tues. Nov. 25 -- Final Exam

