Department of Sociology Dartmouth College Fall 2014

Course: Introduction to Sociology (Sociology 1)

Time:

MWF 8:45-9:50 Thursday 9:00-9:50 (X-hour)

Instructor: John Campbell 123 Silsby Hall Office phone: 646-2542

Office Hours: Monday 1:00-3:00 (or by appointment)

Email: I will try to answer email queries as soon as I can. However, given the rather large amount of email I receive, I can make no guarantees how fast that will be. For the same reason, my responses may be rather short. Please do not take offense.

Course Description: What is society? How have societies developed historically? How do they distribute wealth, income and other resources? How do they organize political authority and economic power? How do they coordinate work? How do they socialize people to "fit in" with those around them? How do they produce culture? This course provides answers to these and other questions in ways that provide an introduction to the field of sociology. It focuses on a broad range of theory and research showing how sociologists think about and study these questions. In many cases, the topics covered in the course reflect the research interests and course offerings of faculty in the sociology department at Dartmouth. As a result, the course also provides an introduction to some of the curriculum offered in the department.

Required Texts: Listed below are the required books for the course. They are available at Wheelock Books, the Dartmouth Bookstore, and are on reserve at Baker-Berry Library. There are also a few additional required articles. These are listed in the syllabus below and posted on the course's Blackboard site on the Web.

Francesco Duina. 2011. Institutions and the Economy. New York: Polity Press. Gary Alan Fine. 2008. Kitchens: The Culture of Restaurant Work. Berkeley: University of California
Press (2nd edition). Katherine Kellogg. 2011. Challenging Operations: Medical Reform and Resistance in Surgery.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Shamus Rahman Khan. 2011. Privilege: The Making of an Adolescent Elite at St. Paul's School.
Princeton: Princeton University Press. Kevin Leicht and Scott Fitzgerald. 2014. Middle Class Meltdown in America. New York: Routledge. Theda Skocpol and Vanessa Williamson. 2012. The Tea Party and the Remaking of Republican
Conservatism. New York: Oxford University Press. William Julius Wilson. 2009. More Than Just Race: Being Black and Poor in the Inner City. New
York: Norton.

General Course Requirements: All students are expected to attend lectures, do the reading and take the exams.

2

Attendance Policy: Class attendance will not be taken. Beware, however, that about half of the questions on each exam will be based on lecture material.

Examinations: There will be three multiple choice exams including the final exam. The exam dates are listed below in the syllabus. The exams are not intended for you to demonstrate your command of facts per se but rather to make logical connections between facts, theories and other information presented in the course. In short, exams are designed to make you think rather than simply regurgitate memorized material. (NB: I strongly encourage you to form small study groups prior to the exams to review your lecture notes and readings.)

Make-up Policy: As a general rule there will be NO make-up exams. In extraordinary circumstances a make-up may be possible if (1) you know in advance that you will be unable for extraordinary reasons to take the exam, and you make arrangements with the instructor at least one week before the scheduled exam date, or (2) you are seriously ill and have written confirmation from either a dean or physician that this prevented you from taking the exam. The instructor reserves the right to refuse permission for a make-up exam if he feels it is not warranted. Notably, having other exams scheduled during the same week is not an acceptable reason for requesting a make-up exam. (Note that instructors are not permitted to grant make-ups for a final exam unless the student also receives approval from their class dean. But the final decision is still made by the instructor.)

Grading: Your grade will be based on the total number of points earned on the exams. At the end of the term everyone's point totals will be calculated, the distribution of these individual point totals will be calculated and initial cutting points for letter grades will be assigned. The overall class grade point average (GPA) will then be calculated. If the class GPA is too low (less than about 3.0), then cutting points will be adjusted as necessary to bring the class GPA up to an acceptable level. If the initial class GPA is higher than about 3.0, the cutting points will not be adjusted. Once the final cutting points have been determined, then each person will be assigned a final letter grade. If an individual's total point score falls just below a cutting point, they may be bumped up to the next letter grade if they have shown significant improvement over the three exams.

Exam #1 Exam #2 Exam #3

70 points/35 questions 70 points/35 questions 70 points/35 questions

(Note: The third exam may be cumulative.)

Honor Principle: Examinations will be conducted in accord with the principles of academic honor detailed in the Dartmouth Organization, Regulations and Courses.

Students with Disabilities: Students with learning, physical, or psychiatric disabilities enrolled in this course that may need disability-related classroom or other accommodations are encouraged to make an appointment to see the instructor before the end of the second week of the term. All discussions will remain confidential, although the Student Disability Services office may be consulted to discuss appropriate implementation of any accommodation requested. Students who want to discuss this should provide the instructor with a copy of a disability registration form, which lists the accommodations recommended for them by the Student Disability Services within the Academic Skills Center. This will also verify that you are registered for disabilities services. If you do not have such a form, please see the Director of Student Disability Services to get one.

3
Reading Assignments: The reading assignments for the course are listed below. It is expected that you will have done the reading by the time class meets on the date for which the assignment is listed in the syllabus. There is a lot of reading so you should keep up with it as we go along. Otherwise you will be faced with an extraordinary amount of reading the night before the exam. A series of "focal points" to help guide your reading are listed after each group of lectures relevant to a particular book or set of articles. (NB: I strongly encourage you to take notes on the readings, i.e., short summaries of each book chapter or article, which will help focus your attention as you read. This will also expedite studying for the exams.)
MCAT Preparation: Students taking the MCAT are now expected to be familiar with material from sociology and psychology and are advised to take an introductory course in sociology as partial preparation for that portion of the exam. Much of what we cover in this course is listed in The Official Guide to the MCAT (4th edition), chapters 9 and 12, as material that may be covered on the exam. For example, we will cover the following concepts and theories about them that are mentioned in The Official Guide to the MCAT: macro- and micro-sociology, social structure, institutions, norms, folkways, social inequality, social stratification, social mobility, poverty, prejudice, discrimination, race, gender, ethnicity, class, status, prestige, power, inclusion and exclusion, meritocracy, anomie, alienation, culture, cultural capital, social capital, human capital, sanctions, anomie, alienation, organizations, bureaucracy, organizational environments, networks, group think, groups, roles, role conflict, socialization, self, selfidentity, interpersonal interaction, presentation of self, impression management, front and back stage behavior, symbolic interactionism, functionalism, conflict theory, exchange theory, rational choice theory.
Note, however, that scientific reasoning, which is also a part of the MCAT, will be illustrated in readings and lectures, but that no formal introduction to research methods, variables, hypothesis testing, etc. will be offered in this course. The term is too short to include that. Nor will we formally address data collection methods (e.g., reliability, validity, sampling) although you will read and hear about examples of various sociological methods (e.g., surveys, ethnography, historical, interviews, statistical analysis, etc.) and research designs (e.g., longitudinal, cross-sectional, experimental, cross-national). The same goes for data interpretation (e.g., graphs, charts, tables, statistics). Much of this material is covered in courses on either statistics or research methods, which the sociology department offers regularly.
Course Outline:
Part I. What is Sociology?
Sep 15 Introduction to the Course
Part II. The Development of Modern Society and the Foundations of Sociology
Sep 17 Marx's Conflict Sociology Bert Adams and R.A. Sydie. "Radical Anti-capitalism: Marx and Engels." (On Blackboard)
Sep 19 Durkheim's Functionalist Sociology Bert Adams and R.A. Sydie. "Society as Sui Generis: Durkheim." (On Blackboard)

4
Sep 22 Weber's Historical Comparative-Historical Sociology Bert Adams and R.A. Sydie. "Social Action and Social Complexity: Max Weber and Marianne Weber." (On Blackboard)
Focal points for the Adams and Sydie readings: How do Marx, Durkheim and Weber explain the development of modern societies? What are their theories of history? How does each one explain how order is maintained in modern societies? For each one what affect does modern society have on the individual living in it? (NB: It is much less important that you understand each theorist's personal biography than that you understand his theories.)
Part III. The Heart of the Matter: Inequality
Sep 24 Economic Inequality Kevin Leicht & Scott Fitzergerald. Middle Class Meltdown in America. (Begin reading.)
Sep 25 X-HOUR. Economic Inequality: Theories of Inequality and Stratification Kevin Leicht & Scott Fitzergerald. Middle Class Meltdown in America. (Continue reading.)
Sep 26 NO CLASS Kevin Leicht & Scott Fitzergerald. Middle Class Meltdown in America. (Continue reading.)
Sep 29 Racial Inequality Kevin Leicht & Scott Fitzergerald. Middle Class Meltdown in America. (Finish reading.)
Focal points for Leicht and Fitzgerald: What is the middle class meltdown? How has the distribution of income and wealth changed since the 1970s? How do middle class families survive economically in today's world? Is the plight of middle class families their own fault or due to structural factors beyond their control?
Oct 1 Racial Inequality William Julius Wilson. More Than Just Race. (Begin reading)
Oct 3 Gender Inequality William Julius Wilson. More Than Just Race. (Continue reading.)
Oct 6 Gender Inequality William Julius Wilson. More Than Just Race. (Continue reading.)
Oct 8 Exam Review William Julius Wilson. More Than Just Race. (Finish reading.)
Focal points for Wilson: What is the declining significance of race? What is the feminization of poverty? What does Wilson mean when he says that structural factors cause racial inequality and poverty? Do poor African-Americans subscribe to traditional American values? What is the

5
relationship between culture and poverty in poor neighborhoods?
Oct 10 EXAM #1
Part IV. Analyzing Social Institutions
Oct 13 The Economy Francesco Duina. Institutions and the Economy. (Begin reading chaps. 1, 2, 4, 5 only.)
Oct 15 The Economy Francesco Duina. Institutions and the Economy. (Finish reading chaps. 1, 2, 4, 5 only.)
Focal points for Duina: What is an institution? How do institutions "enable" and "shape" economic activity? How do they affect the structure and behavior of individuals? How do they affect economic activity at the national and international levels? Are the forces of economic globalization homogenizing how national economies are organized and operate?
Oct 17 The State Theda Skocpol & Vanessa Williamson. The Tea Party and the Remaking of Republican Conservatism. (Begin reading.)
Oct 20 The State Theda Skocpol & Vanessa Williamson. The Tea Party and the Remaking of Republican Conservatism.. (Continue reading.)
Oct 22 The State: Film­"Obama's Deal" Theda Skocpol & Vanessa Williamson. The Tea Party and the Remaking of Republican Conservatism.. (Finish reading.)
Focal points for Skocpol and Williamson: What does the Tea Party movement believe in? What is the movement's goals? Why was the movement established in the first place? Is the movement a grassroots phenomena built from the ground up at the local level? Is the movement an elite phenomena built by wealthy benefactors from the top down? Has the movement been successful? Is the Tea Party movement a political party?
Oct 23 X-HOUR: The Schools Shamus Khan. Privilege. (Begin reading.)
Oct 24 The Schools Shamus Khan. Privilege. (Continue reading.)
Oct 27 Exam Review Shamus Khan. Privilege. (Finish reading.)
Focal points for Khan: What is cultural capital? How is it transmitted to students at St. Paul's? What form does the cultural capital being transmitted at St. Paul's take; what are its most important features? What is "relational achievement" and its relationship to the social hierarchy at St. Paul's?

6
Is the transmission of cultural capital accepted without question at St. Paul's or is there resistance to it's transmission? How does the experience of St. Paul's differ for students of different races and genders?
Oct 29 EXAM #2
Part V. Analyzing Organizations
Oct 31 Bureaucracy Katherine Kellogg. Challenging Operations. (Begin Continue reading.)
Nov 3 Organizational Fields & Isomorphism Katherine Kellogg. Challenging Operations. (Continue reading.)
Nov 5 NO CLASS Katherine Kellogg. Challenging Operations. (Continue reading.)
Nov 7 The Labor Process Katherine Kellogg. Challenging Operations. (Finish reading.)
Focal points for Kellogg: How are organizations affected by their surrounding environments? Do common environmental pressures cause organizations in a field to conform to each other? How do macro-level factors affect change in organizations? How do micro-level factors affect change in organizations? Do organizations necessarily change in ways that make them more efficient?
Part VI. Analyzing Interpersonal Interaction
Nov 10 Symbolic Interaction Gary Alan Fine. Kitchens. (Begin reading.)
Nov 12 Presentation of Self Gary Alan Fine. Kitchens. (Continue reading.)
Nov 14 Production of Culture Gary Alan Fine. Kitchens. (Continue reading.)
Nov 17 Exam Review Gary Alan Fine. Kitchens. (Finish reading.)
Focal points for Fine: How is the culture of a restaurant kitchen created? What are some of the important aspects of restaurant kitchen culture? What environmental factors limit how well a chef can create the aesthetic food she wants? Why does Fine think that the food created in restaurant kitchens is a cultural product?
Nov 23 EXAM #3 Sunday, 8:00 am

