Professor: Emily Walton Office: Silsby 108 Office Phone: 646-2552 email: Emily.C.Walton@Dartmouth.edu

Sociology 47 Race and Ethnicity
Fall 2012 Dartmouth College Place: Thornton 104 Time: MWF 11:15-12:20 X-hour: Tues 12:00-12:50 Office Hours: T/Th 10:30-11:30

Description of the course

To many eyes, racial distinctions are self-evident, natural, and objectively-defined. In this course, we problematize this practice of defining racial categories based on phenotypic differences, instead taking a sociological approach to understanding the ways in which racial differences are socially constructed. Throughout this course, we will explore how race matters by studying racial identity and experience, immigration and assimilation, diversity, and inequality.

Required reading · Thurston, Baratunde. 2012. How To Be Black. New York: HarperCollins Publishers.
All other required readings are posted in electronic format on the course blackboard site. The reading load in this course is high, commensurate with an upper-level course. I expect you to read all course material, before class on the day that we are discussing it. Discussion is a frequent part of this course and everyone is expected to contribute.

Assignments 1. Participation (100 points) Participation in class discussions and group work makes up a very important part of your grade. You must be able to demonstrate in class ­ verbally in discussion, through group work, and through in-class writing ­ that you have read and understood the material. I will keep track of your participation in our in-class work, and this record, in addition to your participation in class discussions will comprise your participation grade. Any students not earning an "A" in participation by Week 5 will receive an email from me in order to give you time to improve the grade. 2. Critical Memos (100 points) Everyone is expected to contribute to the classroom's collective learning experience. For each class meeting indicated with on the assigned reading list, you will have the opportunity to bring a one page (single spaced) critical memo. This will consist of a list of critical comments, reactions, and related questions that you developed from reading and reflecting on the assigned readings for that class. There will be 10 opportunities to write memos; you must choose 5 of them. Please bring two copies of your memo to class; turn one in to me at the beginning of class and keep one for your use during our class discussion.

1

The aim of these commentaries is more than simply to gauge your understanding of the assigned readings. It is to help you develop your critical thinking skills. I want you to think creatively. It is fine to also include in your list any specific questions or comments regarding material that you find unclear or confusing (and why that is so)--however, your list should not be a summary of the reading and must contain critical ideas and questions that the reading raised for you. You will be expected to raise these critical ideas and questions during class and contribute to the classroom discussions. 3. Exams (200 points) We will have two exams in the course; both in-class, closed-book and closed-notes exams. The exams will be entirely essay-based, and you will be graded on how well you incorporate all elements of course material into your essay answers. Exam questions will require you to synthesize and analyze the course readings and lecture material. 4. Final paper (80 points) and presentation (20 points) Throughout the quarter, please read How To Be Black, by Baratunde Thurston. I would like you to write a 5-7 page paper in which you reflect on your own racialization experiences and critically analyze how they tie in with the themes of the course. The paper is due Mon, Nov 12th. Papers turned in after the start of class on the day they are due will have 5 points deducted; Papers will have an additional 10 points deducted for each day they are late. Additionally, you will share your reflections with the class in a 5-minute presentation during the final week. The presentations will occur in class on Wed, Nov 7th and Fri, Nov 9th.

Final Course Grade

Points 470-500 450-469 435-449 420-434 400-419 385-399 370-384 350-369 335-349 320-334 300-319

Percent 94-100% 90-93% 87-89% 84-86% 80-83% 77-79% 74-76% 70-73% 67-69% 64-66% 60-63%

Grade A AB+ B BC+ C CD+ D D-

2

Important notes Attendance It is my expectation that you will attend each class meeting--and that you will arrive to each class on time and stay for the duration. I will circulate an attendance sign-in sheet at the beginning of each class meeting; it is your responsibility to make sure you sign it each day. Please do not email me when you are missing class. There are no opportunities to make up missed work, or missed in-class assignments; and there is no need to seek my approval for any absences. You must get the notes that you miss from a fellow student. Because it is necessary to be in class to participate, missing more than four class periods without a valid medical excuse will result in failure of the course. In case of extended absences, please inform me as soon as possible. We will discuss whether you can successfully complete the class. Health and Well-Being Please use your best judgment about coming to class if you have any of the symptoms of the flu (e.g. fever, cough, body aches). None of us want to be contaminated! Accommodations Students requiring disability-related accommodations must register with the Student Accessibility Services office. Once SAS has authorized accommodations, students must show the originally signed SAS Services and Consent Form and/or a letter on SAS letterhead to their professor. As a first step, if students have questions about whether they qualify to receive accommodations, they should contact the SAS office. All inquiries and discussions about accommodations will remain confidential. Communication My office hours are for you. You are welcome to come in and talk with me about anything during my office hours. I regularly check e-mail during the school day (8am-5pm) and will make every effort to reply to messages as soon as possible. Please use your Dartmouth email address to correspond with me this quarter. This course has a blackboard site. I expect students to regularly check blackboard and their Dartmouth e-mail accounts for class announcements and updates. This is especially important if you miss class. Academic Honor I will be following the Academic Honor Principle described in the Dartmouth College Student Handbook and will enforce this policy to the full extent. Students must do their own work--they will write their own papers and exams, prepare their own presentations, and cite the original sources of any material they draw on for their papers. Any student who submits work which is not his or her own, or commits other acts of academic dishonesty is subject to disciplinary action, up to and including suspension or separation. Classroom Responsibility and Courtesy This is a course in which we will often discuss sensitive topics. Students are welcome to express their opinions, but they should be expressed (and received) respectfully. Please put your cell phones on vibrate (or off!), do not text, and limit laptop use to note-taking. It is distracting to me and to your fellow students when you `abuse' technology during class. Fair warning - if it becomes an issue, I may ban laptops altogether. I know it is tempting to check email/facebook/twitter during class but it ultimately harms everyone's experience and learning (not to mention that it irks your professor). There will also be many times during the quarter when I ask you to close your laptops so we can have a better discussion. Thus, you may wish to have an alternate way of taking notes.
3

Course Plan and Readings

PART I: THEORIZING RACE AND ETHNICITY

Week One: Social Construction and Social Significance

Mon., Sept. 10 Introduction to the course

X-hour

Film: The Difference Between Us

Wed., Sept. 12 Race is a social construct · Harris, "How Our Skins Got Their Color"

Fri., Sept. 14

Race as continuous, not discrete · Omi and Winant, "Racial Formations" · Lewis, "Everyday Race-Making"

Week Two: Race, ethnicity, and change

Mon., Sept. 17 Racial and ethnic distinctions · Cornell and Hartmann, Ethnicity and Race (Ch.2)

X-hour

Film: The Story We Tell

Wed., Sept. 19 Racial and ethnic demography of the U.S.

Fri., Sept. 21

Race and ethnicity in the Census over time · Snipp, "Defining Race and Ethnicity" · Bring Census 2010 homework to class

Week Three: Racialization and ethnic experiences

Mon., Sept. 24 Racialization and intermediate groups · Rumbaut, "Pigments of Our Imagination" · O'Brien, "Not White or Black, but In Between"

X-hour

Film: The House We Live In

Wed., Sept. 26 Asian American experiences
· Wu, Yellow (Ch.1) · Tuan, Forever Foreigners (Ch.1, Ch.7)

Fri., Sept. 28

Whiteness
· Waters, Ethnic Options (Ch.1, Ch.7) · Brodkin, How Jews Became White Folks (Ch.1)

4

PART II: RACISM AND INEQUALITY

Week Four: Racism

Mon., Oct. 1 What is racism? · Yetman, "Prejudice, Discrimination, and Racism"

X-hour

Film: Black. White.

Wed., Oct. 3

Why does racism happen? · Blumer, "Race Prejudice as a Sense of Group Position" · Waldinger, "When the Melting Pot Boils Over"

Fri., Oct. 5 Exam #1 in class

Week Five: Race and social institutions

Mon., Oct. 8

Schools · Kozol, Savage Inequalities (Ch.5) · Ferguson, Bad Boys (Ch.1, field note "self-description, Ch.4)

X-hour

Film: Black. White.

Wed., Oct. 10 Workplace · Newman and Ellis, "There's No Shame in My Game" · Kandel and Parrado, "Hispanics in the American South"

Fri., Oct. 12

Criminal justice system
· Pager, "The Mark of a Criminal Record" · Alexander, "The New Jim Crow"

Week Six: Space and Place

Mon., Oct. 15 Segregation
· Briggs, "More Pluribus, Less Unum?" · Charles, "Can We Live Together?"

X-hour

Film: Black. White.

Wed., Oct. 17

Inner city life
· Anderson, "The Code of the Streets" · Duneier, Sidewalk ("Introduction" and "How Sixth Avenue Became a
Sustaining Habitat")

5

Fri., Oct. 19

Ethnic neighborhoods
· Small, "Four Reasons to Abandon the Idea of the `Ghetto'" · Aguilar-San Juan, Little Saigons (Ch.5)

Week Seven: Interpersonal racism

Mon., Oct. 22 Laissez-faire racism · Bobo, "Laissez-Faire Racism"

X-hour

Film: Black. White.

Wed., Oct. 24 Daily experiences
· Feagin, "The Continuing Significance of Race" · McIntosh, "White Privilege"

Fri., Oct. 26

Stereotypes and racist violence
· Staples, "Just Walk On By" · Sun, "Ling Woo in Historical Context" · Hwang, "The Interrelationship between Anti-Asian Violence and Asian
America"

PART III: RESISTANCE AND CHANGE

Week Eight: Resistance and change

Mon., Oct. 29 Civil rights

X-hour

Film: February One

Wed., Oct. 31 Color blindness · Gallagher, "Color-Blind Privilege" · Guinier and Torres, "The Ideology of Color Blindness"

Fri., Nov. 2

Affirmative action · Pincus, "What is Affirmative Action?"

Week Nine: Looking forward

Mon., Nov. 5

Superdiversity
· Rodriguez, "Horizontal City" · Vertovec, "New Complexities of Cohesion in Britain"

X-hour

Film: What's Race Got to Do with It?

6

Wed., Nov. 7 Action steps (presentations) Fri., Nov. 9 Action steps (presentations)
Week Ten: Putting it all together Mon., Nov. 12 Course wrap-up · Final paper due in class Sun., Nov. 18 Final Exam, 3:00pm
References Aguilar-San Juan, Karin 2009. Little Saigons: Staying Vietnamese in America. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press. Alexander, Michelle. 2012. "The New Jim Crow." Pp. 217-225 in Rethinking the Color Line: Readings in
Race and Ethnicity, edited by C. A. Gallagher. New York: McGraw Hill. Anderson, Elijah. 2012. "The Code of the Streets." Pp. 176-184 in Rethinking the Color Line: Readings in
Race and Ethnicity, edited by C. A. Gallagher. New York: McGraw Hill. Blumer, Herbert. 1958. "Race Prejudice as a Sense of Group Position." The Pacific Sociological Review
1:3-7. Bobo, Lawrence D. 2012. "Laissez-Faire Racism, Racial Inequality, and the Role of the Social Sciences."
Pp. 148-157 in Rethinking the Color Line: Readings in Race and Ethnicity, edited by C. A. Gallagher. New York: McGraw Hill. Briggs, Xavier de Souza. 2005. "More Pluribus, Less Unum? The Changing Geography of Race and Opportunity." Pp. 17-41 in The Geography of Opportunity: Race and Housing Choice in Metropolitan America, edited by X. d. S. Briggs. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press. Brodkin, Karen. 1998. "How Did Jews Become White Folks?" Pp. 25-52 in How Jews Became White Folks: And What That Says About Race in America. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. Charles, Camille Zubrinsky. 2005. "Can We Live Together? Racial Preferences and Neighborhood Outcomes." Pp. 45-80 in The Geography of Opportunity: Race and Housing Choice in Metropolitan America, edited by X. d. S. Briggs. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press. Cornell, Stephen and Douglas Hartmann. 2007. Ethnicity and Race. Thousand Oaks: Pine Forge Press. Duneier, Mitchell. 1999. Sidewalk. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
7

Feagin, Joe R. 1991. "The Continuing Significance of Race: Antiblack Discrimination in Public Places." American Sociological Review 56:101-116.
Ferguson, Ann Arnett. 2001. Bad Boys: Public Schools in the Making of Black Masculinity. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.
Gallagher, Charles A. 2012. "Color-Blind Privilege: The Social and Political Functions of Erasing the Color Line in Post-Race America." Pp. 92-100 in Rethinking the Color Line: Readings in Race and Ethnicity, edited by C. A. Gallagher. New York: McGraw Hill.
Guinier, Lani and Gerald Torres. 2012. "The Ideology of Color Blindness." Pp. 101-105 in Rethinking the Color Line: Readings in Race and Ethnicity, edited by C. A. Gallagher. New York: McGraw Hill.
Harris, Marvin. 2012. "How Our Skins Got Their Color." Pp. 7-8 in Rethinking the Color Line: Readings in Race and Ethnicity, edited by C. A. Gallagher. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Hwang, Victor M. 2007. "The Interrelationship between Anti-Asian Violence and Asian America." Pp. 309-320 in Race, Ethnicity, and Gender: Selected Readings, edited by J. F. Healey and E. O'Brien. Los Angeles: Pine Forge Press.
Kandel, William and Emilio A. Parrado. 2012. "Hispanics in the American South and the Transformation of the Poultry Industry." Pp. 275-284 in Rethinking the Color Line: Readings in Race and Ethnicity, edited by C. A. Gallagher. New York: McGraw Hill.
Kozol, Jonathan. 1991. Savage Inequalities: Children in America's Schools. New York: Harper Perennial. Lewis, Amanda E. 2003. "Everyday Race-Making: Navigating Racial Boundaries in Schools." American
Behavioral Scientist 47:283-305. Massey, Douglas S. 2012. "Residential Segregation and Neighborhood Condition in U.S. Metropolitan
Areas." Pp. 158-175 in Rethinking the Color Line: Readings in Race and Ethnicity, edited by C. A. Gallagher. New York: McGraw Hill. McIntosh, Peggy. 1990. "White Privilege: Unpacking the Invisible Knapsack." Independent School:31-36. Newman, Katherine S. and Catherine Ellis. 2012. "'There's No Shame in My Game': Status and Stigma among Harlem's Working Poor." Pp. 249-260 in Rethinking the Color Line: Readings in Race and Ethnicity, edited by C. A. Gallagher. New York: McGraw Hill. O'Brien, Eileen. 2007. "Not White or Black, but In Between: Latinos and Asian Americans Expanding the Language of Colorblind Racism." Pp. 291-299 in Race, Ethnicity, and Gender: Selected Readings, edited by J. F. Healey and E. O'Brien. Los Angeles: Pine Forge Press. Omi, Michael and Howard Winant. 2012. "Racial Formations." Pp. 17-22 in Rethinking the Color Line: Readings in Race and Ethnicity, edited by C. A. Gallagher. New York: McGraw Hill. Pager, Devah. 2003. "The Mark of a Criminal Record." American Journal of Sociology 108:937-975.
8

Pincus, Fred L. 2007. "What is Affirmative Action?" Pp. 146-155 in Race, Ethnicity, and Gender: Selected Readings, edited by J. F. Healey and E. O'Brien. Los Angeles: Pine Forge Press.
Rodriguez, Richard. 1987. "Horizontal City." Pp. 281-282 in From Different Shores: Perspectives on Race and Ethnicity in America, edited by R. Takaki. New York: Oxford University Press.
Rumbaut, Rubén G. 2009. "Pigments of Our Imagination: On the Racialization and Racial Identities of "Hispanics" and "Latinos"." Pp. 15-36 in How the U.S. Racializes Latinos: White Hegemony and Its Consequences, edited by J. D. a. J. R. F. José A. Cobas: Paradigm Publishers.
Small, Mario Luis. 2008. "Four Reasons to Abandon the Idea of the 'Ghetto'." City & Community 7:389­ 398.
Snipp, C. Matthew. 2012. "Defining Race and Ethnicity." Pp. 22-32 in Rethinking the Color Line: Readings in Race and Ethnicity, edited by C. A. Gallagher. New York: McGraw Hill.
Staples, Brent. 2007. "Just Walk On By: A Black Man Ponders His Power to Alter Public Space." Pp. 177178 in Race, Ethnicity, and Gender: Selected Readings, edited by J. F. Healey and E. O'Brien. Los Angeles: Pine Forge Press.
Sun, Chyng Feng. 2002. "Ling Woo in Historical Context: The New Face of Asian American Stereotypes on Television." Pp. 656­664 in Gender, Race, and Class in Media: A Text-Reader edited by G. Dines and J. M. Humez: Sage.
Tuan, Mia. 2005. Forever Foreigners or Honorary Whites? New Brusnwick: Rutgers University Press. Vertovec, Steven. 2007. "New Complexities of Cohesion in Britain: Super-Diversity, Transnationalism,
and Civil-Integration." Queen's Printer and Controller of Her Majesty's Stationery Office, West Yorkshire. Waldinger, Roger. 2012. "When the Melting Pot Boils Over: The Irish, Jews, Blacks, and Koreans of New York." Pp. 241-249 in Rethinking the Color Line: Readings in Race and Ethnicity, edited by C. A. Gallagher. New York: McGraw Hill. Waters, Mary C. 1990. Ethnic Options: Choosing Identities in America. Berkeley: University of California Press. Wu, Frank H. 2002. "East is East, East is West: Asians as Americans." Pp. 1-38 in Yellow: Race in America Beyond Black and White. New York: Basic Books. Yetmann, Norman. 2007. "Prejudice, Discrimination, and Racism." Pp. 9-22 in Race, Ethnicity, and Gender: Selected Readings, edited by J. F. Healey and E. O'Brien. Los Angeles: Pine Forge Press.
9

