Department of Sociology Dartmouth College Spring 2014

Sociological Classics (Sociology 15)

Professor: Marc Dixon Office: 103 Silsby Phone: 603-646-9041 E-mail: Marc.D.Dixon@Dartmouth.edu

Course Information: MWF, 10-11:05, 219 Wilson X-period: Thursday 12-12:50 Office hours: MW 12-1, or by appointment

Course Description: This course offers an introduction to sociological theory through the works of seminal nineteenth and twentieth-century thinkers including Max Weber, Karl Marx, Emile Durkheim and Georg Simmel among others, writers whose ideas are still of enormous significance in shaping perspective and framing terms of argument among many major contemporary social and political thinkers. It fulfills the theory requirement for majors in the Department of Sociology. Among specific subjects to be covered are the following: sources of social and political order; conflict and inequality; social networks and social integration; and questions of how shared ideals or divisive interests affect not just the study of human society, but the course of history itself.

Evaluation: Grades are based on participation and group work, in-class writing, and three exams. The composition of final grades and grading scale are as follows:

Course Requirements Participation­10% Theory Brief and Group Presentation-10% In-Class Writing­20% Three exams ­ 20% each

Grading Scale A 93-100 A- 90- 92.99 B+ 87- 89.99 B 83- 86.99 B- 80- 82.99 C+ 77-79.99 Etc.

1- Participation: While I will lecture on certain materials, students are expected to attend and be active participants throughout the course. Participation is assessed in a number of ways. Over the quarter I will call on each one of you at least once to contribute on a various reading or topic. More often I will have inclass assignments for your theory group (groups are assigned the first week of class) that relate to the day's topic.
2-Theory Brief and Group Presentation: Working in groups of four, students will present on a particular theorist and work during the quarter. Groups will post a few key questions to the course website for the class to consider the night before presentation, offer a short (15-20 minute) summary of the theorist and

SOCY 15--Spring 2014
the work, and then lead a class discussion. The written product will be one to two-page single-spaced brief that gives a short background on the author, identifies the particular problem the author is addressing, lays out the main themes of the author's argument, and identifies areas of contention or problems with either the argument or the evidence the author provides.
3-In-class writing: We will have one in-class writing day for each of three major sections of the course: Wednesday, April 2; Monday, April 21; and Monday, May 5. The goal is to work through a complex argument, identify its key claims, and draw out some logical implications. A series of general questions pertaining to that day's reading and topic will be posted on the course website the night before. In class students will work through a more specific subset of these questions for twenty-five to thirty minutes and will submit their write-up via the course website or (if writing by hand) to the instructor. We will spend the remainder of the class period working through these questions as a group. Please Note: write-ups will not be accepted if the student does not attend and participate in class that day. Late write-ups are not accepted.
3-Exams: Students will take in-class exams on Monday, April 14 and Wednesday, April 30 and Monday, May 19. Exams are open book, but you will not be permitted to discuss them with anyone else. You may bring your laptop to write the essay portion of the mid-terms if you choose. If you do choose this option, you must be able to submit the essay via the course website at the end of the exam and it is your responsibility to make sure it arrives "postmarked" no later than the end of the class period. Exams will be graded for an integration and deep understanding of course material, coherent and well-reasoned arguments, and professional writing skills (more so for the final). The exams will be fairly evenly divided between readings and lecture/discussion.
Required Readings: Students will want to purchase the following books available at the Dartmouth bookstore.
Durkheim, Emile. 1979. Suicide. The Free Press. (translated by John A Spaulding and George Simpson). ISBN 0-684-83632-7
Weber, Max. 2009. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism with Other Writings on the Rise of the West (Stephen Kalberg Translation). Oxford. ISBN 978-0-19533253-7
Optional: A copy will be on reserve at the library.
nd
Marx, Karl. 1978. The Marx-Engels Reader (2 edition edited by Robert C. Tucker). Norton & Co. ISBN 0-393-09040-X
Canvas: Several required readings are posted on the canvas course site. It is your responsibility to check the site at the beginning of each week.
A note on the readings: It is expected that you will have done the reading by the time class meets on the date for which the assignment is due. These are original works and are often difficult to get through on the first try. It is in your interest to keep up. I will help put these works in context and there are several texts with additional materials on individual theorists that you may find useful. The following are on reserve at Baker Library:
Coser, Lewis A. 1971. Masters of sociological thought: ideas in historical and social context. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. http://libcat.dartmouth.edu/record=b2203114~S1
Zeitlin, Irving M. 1981. Ideology and the development of sociological theory. Prentice-Hall
2

SOCY 15--Spring 2014

sociology series. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. http://libcat.dartmouth.edu/record=b1558290~S1 Martin, John Levi. 2011. The Explanation of Social Action. New York: Oxford. http://libcat.dartmouth.edu/record=b4995326~S1

Course Policies: Honor Principle: Essays and assignments will be conducted in accord with the principles of academic honor detailed in the Dartmouth Organization, Regulations and Courses. Students should read Dartmouth's statement on Sources and Citations: http://www.dartmouth.edu/~writing/sources/

Students with disabilities: Students with disabilities enrolled in this course and who may need disabilityrelated classroom accommodations are encouraged to make an appointment to see me as soon as possible. All discussions will remain confidential, although the Student Accessibility Services office may be consulted to discuss appropriate implementation of any accommodation requested.

Religious Holidays: Some students may wish to take part in religious observances that occur during this academic term. If you have a religious observance that conflicts with your participation in the course, please meet with me as soon as possible to discuss appropriate accommodations.

Classroom Etiquette: Please take care to avoid tinkering with phones, laptops and the like. They are a formidable distraction. You are welcome to take notes on your laptop or tablet, but if you are spending time on the internet your class participation grade will suffer considerably. Finally, always show up to class on time and be courteous to all class participants.

Course Schedule & Assigned Readings: The following is an outline. I will update readings or place other documents and announcements on Canvas for your edification. It is your responsibility to check the course site at the beginning of each week.

Date

Topic & Assigned Readings

Foundations
3-24 Course Introduction and Overview Craig Calhoun, "What Passes for Theory in Sociology?" Charles Lemert, "Social Theory: Its Uses and Pleasures"

3-26 What do we mean by Sociological Theory? And why go back to the `Classics?' Jeffery Alexander, "The Centrality of the Classics" (see especially pp. 12-32) Gabriel Abend, "The Meaning of `Theory'" (see especially through p.181) C. Wright Mills, excerpt from The Sociological Imagination

Critical Theories of Society: Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels 3-28 E.P. Thompson, "Time, Work-Discipline, and Industrial Capitalism."
From the M&E Reader: Friedrich Engels, "Working Class Manchester," pp.579-586 Karl Marx, Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, pp.3-6 Begin Economic & Philosophic Manuscripts, pp.66-105 3-31 Finish Economic & Philosophic Manuscripts

3

SOCY 15--Spring 2014
Arlie Hochschild, excerpts from The Managed Heart (see especially, pp.1-12, 17-23) 4-2 The Communist Manifesto, pp.469-500
In-Class Writing #1 4-4 No Class Meeting 4-7 Karl Marx, Thesis on Feuerbach, pp.143-45
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The German Ideology, pp.146-200 4-9 Marx on Commodity Fetishism, pp. 319-29
Antonio Gramsci, excerpts from the Prison Notebooks **Group Presentation 4-10 X-Hour: Theodor Adorno & Max Horkheimer, "The Culture Industry" 4-11 Bruno Latour, "The Compositionist Manifesto" Optional: Immanuel Wallerstein on World-Systems Theory 4-14 Exam 1 in Class
Social Connectivity in the Modern World: Emile Durkheim 4-16 Excerpt from Durkheim's The Division of Labor 4-18 Excerpts from Durkheim's Rules of Sociological Method
"What is a Social Fact?" "Rules for the Observation of Social Facts" Methodological Appendix to Kahn's Privilege Begin Suicide ((skim book 1; focus on his attempts to rule out common explanations of suicide, Chapters 1,3 & 4) 4-21 Suicide, through book 2 Chaeyoon Lim and Robert Putnam, "Religion, Social Networks, and Life Satisfaction" In-Class Writing #2 4-23 Suicide, Book 3 Chapter 1 Robert Merton, "Social Structure and Anomie" **Group Presentation 4-25 Gabriel Tarde, excerpt from The Laws of Imitation Robert D. Baller and Kelly Richardson, "Social Integration, Imitation and the Geographic Patterning of Suicide." David Maimon and Danielle Kuhl, "Social Control and Youth Suicidality: Situating Durkheim's Ideas in a Multi-Level Framework." **Group Presentation 4-28 Robert Putnam, excerpt from Bowling Alone Peter Hart-Brinson, "New Ways of Bowling Together" 4-30 Exam 2 in Class
Modern Organization and Human Freedom: Max Weber 5-2 Max Weber, "Basic Sociological Terms" (focus on pp.22-26)
"Class, Status, and Party"
5-5 The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, Through Part I In-Class Writing #3
4

SOCY 15--Spring 2014
5-7 The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, Part II (Chapter IV, especially pp.101-123; all of Chapter V)
5-9 Weber excerpts on Bureaucracy and Authority 5-12 Georg Simmel, "The Metropolis and Mental Life"
Kalberg introduction to Part 2, "The Protestant Sects in America..." (pp.163-184) Max Weber, "'Churches' and 'Sects' in North America." (pp.200-204) **Group Presentation 5-14 Robert Merton, "The Bureaucratic Personality" A. Aneesh, "Global Labor" Andrew Martin et al., "Bureaucratic Rule Breaking" 5-16 Excerpts from George Ritzer's Enchanting a Disenchanted World Weber Wrap-up **Group Presentation 5-19 Exam #3 in class 5-21 American Social Theory at the turn of the twentieth century Thorstein Veblen, excerpts from A Theory of the Leisure Class **Group Presentation 5-23 Inequality, Elites, and Social Reproduction Shamus Kahn, excerpts from Privilege 5-26 Reading Day 5-28 W.E.B. Du Bois and Robert Park on Race Relations Course wrap-up **Group Presentation
5

